
--- PAGE 1 ---
 A Complete practical guide to O, A ‘level and Institution. Page 1 
 
A PRACTICAL GUIDE TO SUB ICT & COMPUTER 
STUDIES. 
(A Complete Practical Guide to 0‟Level, A „Level & Institution Computer 
studies and ICT Scholars) 
 
 
 
 
 
BY 
 
Cadre. Kyoribona Nakiir 
 
 
 
 
HEADTEACHR AT THE SCIENCE FOUNDATION COLLEGE. 
PGDISEM - UMI, PGDIT - ISBAT & BAE KYU. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REVISED EDITION 
MARCH - 2019 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
 A Complete practical guide to O, A ‘level and Institution. Page 2 
 
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.  
Copyright © Nakiir 2019 
All rights reserved, no parts of this publication may be reproduced, stored in any 
retrieval system or even transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, 
mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise without prior written permission 
of the author.  
Furthermore, the author reserves the right to revise this publication and even to 
make changes to this content at any time without obligation whatsoever to notify 
any persons or entity of such revision or changes.  
All positive and negative criticism is welcome through;  
Crips Computertech 
 
 
Director  
Cadre K. Nakiir 
+256776222235/0702555411.  
nakiir@yahoo.com.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 3 ---
 A Complete practical guide to O, A ‘level and Institution. Page 3 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
All Thanks be to  the almighty, the most Gracious t he most merciful ALLAH for  
granting me this opportunity over this publication.  
Sincere acknowledgement to the Directors, Administration, Teaching and Non 
Teaching Staff of The Science Foundation College  for their credible support and 
advice. May the almighty reward you abundantly.  
The contin ued efforts of  my fellows in the field for their continued involvement,  
practice and teaching ICT in particular Mr. Mwesigwa Joseph – St Micheal High 
School – Ssonde, Mr. Dyogo Andrew HOD ICT Mpoma Royal, Mr. Isiko Kenneth 
HOD ICT Namilyango S .S.S Mr. Musa HODCT Bombo S .S.S, Mr. Ngobi HOD ICT 
Jinja Progressive, Mr.Odongo HOD ICT Namilyango vocation to mention.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
 A Complete practical guide to O, A ‘level and Institution. Page 4 
 
PREFACE.  
This book covers basics of ICT like Windows and  Accessories, Ms Word Processor, 
Ms Excel (Spread Sheets), Ms Power Point (Presentation), Ms Access(Data Bases), 
Ms Publisher and web Design more over each of them having over  25 resourceful 
questions for reference and simplicity.  
In trying to write this book, I have made it so simple (Simple — Complex) bearing in 
mind that most learners/ students have insufficient or no background knowledge 
about the use of computers.  
This book does not only predispose on the student‘s use in school but to anyone 
outside there that may be willing to learn how to launch and use IT basicprograms.  
It is h owever important to note that th e author has carefully studied the habitual 
National Examination computer studies/Sub ICT syllabi and ha s carefully 
complied content and resourceful papers from resourceful heads, so interesting, 
and moreove r comprehensible to cater for this field of teaching ICT at different 
levels. It is therefore important for the students and teachers to snatch themselves 
a copy so as to ease the teaching — learning process.  
This manuscript is also an inspiration from th e 0‘ level and recently rationalized 
secondary schools A‘ level Curriculum for ICT and Sub math that affect tertiary and 
university entry prerequisite.  
It has also been an inspiration that has been as a result of constructive criticism 
from our fellows in the field and my own students that have driven me to come up 
with such organized manuscript as a need to strengthen computer skills in schools 
and at individual level.  
Compiled content herein is to guide the teacher and learner during practical based 
sessions and partly theory but majorly aims at equipping learners with computer 
skills.  
NB. To my fellow readers/users; I am aware of a number of ICT study pamphlets 
and text books and guides that have already been published and steadily supplied 
country wide. However, “Computer Studies/ICT Practical Guide” as a guide book 
has steadily and carefully been compiled and revised ‗by the teachers who have 
tested the hiccups in delivering of content in this noble field.  
 
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
 A Complete practical guide to O, A ‘level and Institution. Page 5 
 
DEDICATION  
I dedicate this Guide book to all my students of The Science Foundation College 
and St. Michael High School Ssonde who have used part of this book‘s content to 
their benefit.  
I cannot satisfactorily rate th e contribution of my family  in particular my wife 
Nabwire Kauthar, my beloved mother NURIAT KOMUSHANA  and my brother 
Qaasim Abdallah and family  whose hobby is to read and get informed on how to 
better their day today living and standards. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 6 ---
 A Complete practical guide to O, A ‘level and Institution. Page 6 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT         3  
PREFACE           4  
DEDICATION          5  
INTRODUCTION TO WORD PROCESSING      7  
POWER POINT  
ELCTRON IC SPREADSHEET (MS EXCEL)     68  
WORKSHEET DATABASE MANAGEMENT      87  
DATABASE. (MICROSOFT ACCESS)       126  
PUBLICATION (MS PUBLISHER) 
WEB DESIGN          163  
INTRODUCTION TO BASIC HTML       165  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
 A Complete practical guide to O, A ‘level and Institution. Page 7 
 
INTRODCTION TO WORD PROCESSING. 
An electronic Word proce ssor is application software that enables th e user to 
create, edit, format and print more professional text-rich documents.  
A word processor (more formally known as document grounding/preparation 
system) is a computer application used for the production (including composition, 
editing, formatting, and possibly printing) of any sort of printable material  
Computer word processing is application software that encompasses the 
production of professional looking documents. These documents may include the 
following; memos , circulars, preparing letters, greeting cards, doing simple office 
works to mention but a few.  
In a typical office where documents are typeset, formatting and editing of such 
documents becomes a nightmare  where manual modes of document production, 
filling and transmission are used.  
In order to minimize and eliminate such hustles, several electronic devices and 
services by computerized systems and electronic typewriters have been developed 
for more efficiency and effectiveness in document production. There  has always 
been a need to come up with better writing tools to improve on efficiency and 
legibility of the written work.  
Therefore, computerized word processing systems have gotten easy to use 
document edits and formats features capable of making documen ts look more and 
more business like if well mastered. Some people and organizations earn their 
living by producing documents for others using computerized systems.  
Therefore, it is important that learners get introduced to the basic practical 
knowledge an d skills of word processing in order to be able to produce and 
communicate documents better.  
ELECTRONIC WORDPROCESSORS  
Word has got a number of versions and these include the following  
a) Ms Office 97,  
b) Ms Office 2000,  
c) Ms Office 2003,  
d) Ms Office 2007  
e) Ms Office 2010.  
f) Ms Office 2013 and 2016 
 
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
 A Complete practical guide to O, A ‘level and Institution. Page 8 
 
Examples of word processing software/applications include;  
i. Ms Office word processor.  
ii. Word pad.  
iii. Lotus 1, 2 and 3.  
iv. Corel Word Perfect  
v. Apple Works.  
vi. Professional writer.  
vii. Word Pro  
viii. Office org.  
 
ADVANTAGES OF WORD PROCESSOR PROGRAMS  
• Easier to use due to automated features such as Word -wrap, autocorrect 
and auto complete, find and replace feature etc.  
• They have superior editing tools such as spelling checker, the Thesaurus, 
etc., hence making editing easier.  
• Can store documents for future retrieval.  
• They have superior formatting features that make a document more 
appealing to the reader.  
• The user can produce multiple copies more easily.  
• Copy and move (cut) operation make it easier to manipulate a document.  
 
FEATURES OF A WORD PROCESSOR WINDOW:  
Most word processors  have common features. Each task appears  in a rectangular 
area called an application window 
1) Title bar.  
A title bar indicates the task currently running. On its right are the minimize, 
restore and close button.  
2) Menu bar.  
The menu bar provides the user with a group of commands. Each command has a 
drop down list, when click used to create and manipulate a document.  
3) Toolbars/formatting tool bar  
Toolbars consist of buttons of commands (icons) that provide sh ortcuts to 
commands available in the menu bar. The two default toolbars are the standard 
and formatting toolbars. 

--- PAGE 9 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 9 
 
 
The formatting tool bar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5) Status bar  
The status bar is the communication channel between the user and the application 
program. It displays the current page, section line and activities such as file saving 
progress.  
 
CREATING A DOCUMENT USING MICROSOFT WORD. 
While Word 97-2003 look alike and are compatible, Word 2007/10 radically deviates 
from these versions in the look and menu layout. There is no File menu and once text 
is highlighted/blocked, a floating formatting toolbar is displayed above the selected 
text. Moreover, documents saved in 2007/10 format cannot be opened in the previous 
version unless you save the file in compatibility mode.  
The appearance a Microsoft word processor window 
 This is the work area where you create your document. It resembles an ordinary piece 
of paper. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Styles & formatting Font list  Font size list  Bold  Underline Numbering Bullets Indenting 
Italics 
Alignment  Line spacing 
Increase & 
Decrease Font 
size 
Color (font, 
line, fill) 
Figure 1 
Figure 2 

--- PAGE 10 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 10 
 
1) Document Typesetting/Typing Text.  
When typing, once the cursor reaches the end of the current line, it automatically 
jumps to the next line. If a word does not fit in the current line, it automatically wraps 
at the beginning of the next line. This is referred to as word wrap.  
2) Saving a document  
• On the office button/, File menu click the Save As command.  
• Select the storage location from the Save in list box.  
Type the name of the file in the File name box then click OK/save. 
3) Editing a document  
Making changes or modifying an existing document is called editing. Some editing 
operations include:  
4) Deleting text, files and folders.  
To delete a character, a word or a block of text:  
• Highlight the text to be deleted.  
• Press the delete key or the backspace key.  
Note:  
• Delete key erases a character to the right of the cursor while the backspace 
deletes characters to the left.  
• Use the t ype over mode to write characters to the right of the cursor or insert 
mode to insert a character(s)  
5) Find and replace  
Find and replace is used to locate a word or a phrase and replaces it with another.  
To find and replace a word or phrase:  
• On the Edit menu, click Find or Replace.  
• In the Find what box, type the word or phrase to find.  
• Click the Replace tab. In the Replace with  box, type the word or phrase to 
replace the target word or phrase.  
 
 
 
 
 
                    
 Figure 3 
 


--- PAGE 11 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 11 
 
6) Spelling and grammar check.  
Spelling and grammar checker automatically locates  wrongly spelt and  misspelled 
words and grammatical mistakes.  
To spell check a document:  
• On Tools menu click Spelling and Grammar or press F7.  
• In the Spelling and Grammar dialog box, misspelled words are shown in red while 
grammatically incorrect phrases are in green.  
• From the suggestion list, select the correct spelling or grammar.  
• Click Change (All) button. To ignore, click the Ignore (All) button.  
 
7) Thesaurus.  
The thesaurus allows the user to automatically find words or phrases with similar 
meaning (synonyms) or opposite meaning (antonyms) to the one selected.  
To use the thesaurus:  
• Highlight text.  
• On Tools menu, point to Language then click Thesaurus.  
• Select a synonym or an antonym.  
8) Autocorrect and auto Text. 
Autocorrect and Auto Text are used to automatically correct a commonly misspelled 
word and insert a predefined text when creating a document.  
To create an autocorrect or auto text:  
• On the Insert tab menu, point to Auto text, and then click Auto text command.  
• Click the Auto text or Autocorrect tab and type the autocorrect or auto text.  
Click OK to apply and close the dialog box.  
9) Undo and redo.  
Undo reverses the most recently executed command while redo reverts back to the 
cancelled action.  
10) Superscript and Subscript. 
A superscript appears just above the rest of the characters as in cm2 while a subscript 
appears just below other characters as in H20.  
 

--- PAGE 12 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 12 
 
11) To make text superscript or subscript:  
• Highlight character(s):  
• On the Formatting tool bar, you can directly select it i.e. X2 or X2, or click Font  
On the Font dialog box check superscript or subscript.  
12) Paragraph formatting.  
A paragraph is a special block of text dealing with a single theme and starting on a 
new line or  indent. Some of the formatting  features you can apply onto a paragraph 
include: alignment, setting tabs and indents, drop cap, bullets and numbering, line 
spacing, inserting columns and page breaks.  
 
13) Alignment.  
Alignment is the arrangement of text relative to the left margin, center of page or the 
right margin. The five major alignment opt ions available are the left, cent er, right, 
justified and force justified.  
To align text:  
• Highlight the text.  
• On the Formatting tool bar, click Paragraph.  
• In the dialog box, select the Alignment option then click OK.  
14) Line spacing.  
Line spacing is setting space between lines, paragraphs or blocks of text.  
15) To space lines:  
• Highlight the lines of text.  
• On the Format menu, click Paragraph.  
• In the Paragraph dialog box, select the line spacing option from the line spacing 
list box then click the OK button.  
16) Setting tabs and Indents.  
Tabs refer to definite cursor stops when the tab key is 
pressed.  
Indenting is moving a sentence or a block of text away from the margin using the tab 
key.  
 
 


--- PAGE 13 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 13 
 
 
17) To set tabs and indents:  
• On the Formatting tool bar menu, click Tabs.  
• In the Tab dialog box, set the tab stop, alignment and leading then OK.  
• Press the Tab key to increase or the spacebar to decrease the indent, 
alternatively, click the Increase/Decrease indent buttons on th e formatting 
toolbar.  
18) Drop cap.  
A drop cap is a large character in a paragraph that occupies more than one line down. 
19) To create a dropped cap:  
• Highlight the paragraph you want to begin with drop cap.  
• On Format menu, click Drop cap.  
• Click Dropped or In Margin.  
• Specify the number of lines and other options then click OK.  
20) Mail Merge.  
A mail merge is a tool that aids the users create one document and be able to send it  
merge it to a multiple of recipients.  
• To Start a Mall Merge: Select mailings —>Mailings, start mail merge —> you can 
select from the dialog box an option i.e. ―start a step by step mail merge‖  or you 
can use a mail merge wizard.  
• To Select a Data Source: In the Mail Merge task pane, select the appropriate 
option under Create recipient list and click next. Perform the necessary tasks and 
click next when you‘re finished.  
• To Insert a Merge Field: In the Mail Merge task pane, click and drag the 
appropriate merge field to the desired location in the publication. Use the options 
listed under more items as necessary. Click Next.  
• To Complete the Merge: Select the desired option under Create merged 
publications and performs the necessary tasks.  
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 14 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 14 
 
 
21) Text bolding, Underlining and italicizing. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
22) How to Bold  
Press Ctrl + B 
Click the ―B‖ icon on the Home tab at the top of Word  
23) How to Underline  
Press Ctrl+U 
Click the —U‖ icon on the Home tab at the top of Word. 
24) How to Italicize  
Press Ctrl + I 
Click the —I‖ icon on the Home tab at the top of Word  
25) Saving in Ms-Word.  
• If saving for the very first time...  
• Click: Office button+ Save Type File Name+ Choose Location+ Save  
26) Keyboard Shortcut.  
• Ctrl+S+Type File Name + Choose Location+ Save.  
27) Saving after Editing.  
• If you want to change the File Name of the edited document from the  one you 
started with but maintain the original document.  
• Click: Office button+ Save As+ choose format +File Name+ Location  
 
 
 
Bold 
Underline 
Italics 
Strike through 
Superscript 
& 
Subscript 
Change case 
Font color 
Text highlighter 
Figure 4 

--- PAGE 15 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 15 
 
28) Saving while Editing  
• Press Ctrl +S  
OR  
• Click the save icon on the top left corner of the word window.  
29) Word offers five views of your document:  
1. Print Layout View—this is the view Word users generally stay in during most 
of the editing session.  
The Print Layout view displays your document exactly as it will appear on the 
printed page when you print the document.  
By editing in the P rint Layout view, you can more accurately see how those 
changes will affect the final printed document.  
2. Outline Vie w—the Outline view button enables you to manage outlines you 
create in Word.  
3. Draft View —the Draft view hides all margins, pictures, headers, and footers 
from your document so that you can see and edit strictly the text inside.  
Press the Delete key (which is labeled Del on some keyboards) or Backspace Key to 
delete characters where the insertion point appears.  
Every time you press Delete, Word removes one character to the right of the text 
cursor (including a space, number, or even a blank line if that‘s where the insertion 
point is positioned).  
When you press Back space key, Word removes one character to the left of the text 
cursor.  
F5 - Displays the Go to dialog box.  
Shift + Enter -Moves the text cursor to the next line but does not start a new 
paragraph or insert a Paragraph mark.  
 
EDITING COMMANDS AND KEYBOARD SHORTCUTS.  
Ctrl+ left -arrow Moves the text cursor to the beginning of the word.  
Ctrl+Shift+left - arrow Moves the text cursor to the left and selects text as it moves by 
highlighting the text.  
Ctrl+Right- arrow Moves the text cursor to the end of the word.  
 

--- PAGE 16 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 16 
 
Ctrl+Shift+right-arrow Moves the text cursor to the right and. select text as it moves 
by highlighting the text.  
Up arrow -Moves the text cursor up one line at a time.  
To print.  
Select printing options like printer & number of copies  
Click: Office button + Print + Print  
Quick Print  (sends the document directly to the default printer without making 
changes)  
Click: Office button + Print + Quick Print  
Print preview (preview & make changes before printing)  
Click: Office button + Print + Print preview  
Close Preview when through  
Determine What to Print  
Click to select either All or Pages to designate that you  want to print the  Entire 
document or only a portion of it. If you click Pages, type the page  Number or 
arrangement of page numbers (such as 2-5 or 1-10, 15-25) that you want to print.  
 
After selection,  
How to Copy 
Press Ctrl  + C to copy the selection to  your document. The original text rem ains 
unchanged in the document. The selected content is copied and held into the 
clipboard. 
OR  
Right click on the highlighted text & choose copy from the menu  
How to Cut  
Press Ctrl + X. This moves the selected text from its original location to the clipboard. 
This option leaves no copy behind.  
OR  
Right click selected text & choose Cut option  
How to paste  
Choose location  
Press Ctrl + V 

--- PAGE 17 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 17 
 
OR  
Right click on the location & choose paste option.  
Note  
The ribbon bar‘s Clipboard section contains the typical Cut, Copy, and  Paste 
options in case you don‘t want to use the keyboard shortcuts.  
Creating a multicolumn news letter  
• Type your document.  
• Format your headline  
• Select the text you want to appear in your columns  
• Request a section Change  
• Click your ribbon‘s Page Layout tab and click the Breaks button to display the 
available section breaks you can insert.  
• Select Continuous to convert your selected txt to a new section and make it 
reside on the same page as your headline Word adds.  
When we add a new story, we want it to begin on a new page. To do this, you can add 
breaks.  
There are two types of breaks, page breaks and section breaks.  
Section breaks allow you to format things like headers and footers differently. For 
example, we don‘t want headers on pages with a title, but we do want them on other 
pages. Section breaks are ideal for this. If you didn‘t have them, each page would have 
the same header.  
Steps for section Break  
• Scroll to the end of your first story, and ‗left click on a new line  
• Click on the Page Layout tab at the top of Word. Locate the Page Set up panel 
and the Breaks item:  
• Click on Breaks to see the following menu  
• Select Section Breaks > Next Page.  
• This adds a new page to your document, and a new section.  
Page breaks and section break  
When we add a new story, we want it to begin on a new page. To do this, you can add 
breaks.  
There are two types of breaks, page breaks and section breaks.  
Section break s allow yo u to format things like headers and footers diffe rently for 
example, we don‘t want headers on pages with a title, but we do want them on other 

--- PAGE 18 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 18 
 
pages. Section breaks are ideal for this. If you didn‘t have them, each page would have 
the same header.  
Steps for section breaks. 
Scroll to the end of the first story and left click on the new line. 
Click on the page layout tab at the top of the word. Locate the page set up panel and 
the break item 
Click on breaks to see the following menu. 
Select section breaks > next page. 
This adds a new page to your document and a new section. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 19 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 19 
 
 
RESOURCE QUESTIONS FOR WORD PROCESSOR 
 
QUESTION 1.  
(a) Using Microsoft word, type the passage below as it is and answers the questions 
that follow. 
―UNESCO hails Uganda” 
The Director General of the United Nations Educational, scientific and cultural 
Organization (UNESCO), KIOCHIRO Matsuura, has commended Uganda‘s efforts in 
emphasizing science Education. Matsuura, who is here for a two -day visit, said on his 
arrival at Entebbe Airport yesterday that the UN agency was ―enjoying a strong 
bilateral relationship with Uganda. 
―We appreciate Uganda‘s efforts in embracing science and cultural education as part 
of national development. This being my first official vis it here, I hope strengthen the 
ties between Uganda and UNESCO‖, Matsuura said. 
He emphasized that Uganda‘s cultural and scientific education statistics which stand 
as shown in the table below were encouraging by world standards. These statistics 
were carried out in the year 2000, 2001, 2002, 2004 for both cultural and science 
education.  
Cultural education: 
Males (%) 70, 50, 28, 40, and 80 
Females (%) 60,30,96,48 and 78 
Science education: 
Males (%) 30,78,90,20 and 60 
Females (%) 56,89,76,59 and 90 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Males Females 
Cultural education 
Year % Year % 
    
    
    
    
    
Science Education 
Year % Year % 
    
    
    
    
    

--- PAGE 20 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 20 
 
(i) Set the font size to 13 and double space the document.    
(ii) Copy the document and paste it on the next page.    
(iii) Set the title ―UNESCO‖ hails Uganda to font size 14 and bolded.  
(iv) Set the margins to(1.5) and (1.3 right) then bottom and top (1.2)   
(v) Set the document body text to‘ Arial Narrow‖    
(vi) Insert the header as ―Diploma‖ and in italics     
(vii) Set the whole document to justified and font color, red   
(viii) Number pages in uppercase alphabet.      
(ix) Save your work. 
 
QUESTION 2.  
Enter the document below to any word processor available in your  
computer.  
 
 
Computers in business. 
Different types of businesses commonly use computers to assist with day-to-day operating activities as: 
 Sales Order Entry: procedures for handling customer orders, including receipt of the order and 
verification of availability of ordered stock. 
 Inventory Management and Control : procedures of tracking, counting , and reordering stock 
items. 
 Personnel Management: procedures for maintaining employee information (such as hire date, 
salary, performance rating, and date of last review) for both development and reporting 
purposes. 
 Payroll: procedures for producing paychecks and reports on employee compensation. 
 Accounting: procedures for maintaining the company’s financial records. 
 Security: procedures for controlling who has access to what data and information at what times 
and where, and who may enter data to a computer-based information system. 
 Investment and General Financial Management : procedures a company institutes, follows, and 
reviews to guarantee profit and growth. 
Computers are also being used in business to collect and analyze data, to produce concise inform ation for 
management in a clear format suitable for making decisions, and to help managers avoid being overloaded 
with unnecessary information. 
 To keep up to date with detailed information about how computers are being used in the various 
sections of the business and banking world, consult well -known business publications such as Business 
Week, Fortune, and The Wall Street Journal , as well as computer publications such as PC World  and 
Macworld.  
Source: Hutchinson, Sarah E. and Sawyer, Stacey C. (1992). Computers The User Perspective, 3rd edition, pg. 
31, ISBN– 0-256-10435-2 

--- PAGE 21 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 21 
 
Required:  
(i) Change the heading to upper case, bold and underline it.  
(ii) Change the font of the whole document to Tahoma, point size 11 except the 
heading which should be point size 15.      
(iii) Add your name as header.       
(iv) Save your file as Computers in Business.      
(v) Print out a hard copy.        
 
QUESTION 3.  
(i) Using the suitable word processing software, type this document as it is.  
HUMAN BEINGS  
Most infants are guided through life by a parent or guardian and taught how to 
talk, walk, eat and generally behave. The socialization process begins as soon as 
we are born when we being to imitate people around us, copying the shapes and 
noises in our env ironment.  Many other people and circumstances affect our 
appearance, attitude and behavior, such as work, lifestyle, ethnicity, family, 
environment, peer group (friends), gender, media etc.  
Human beings are very different throughout the world and opinion s of what 
constitutes a natural or nurtured human being differ enormously. Without 
socialization, an individual would bear little resemblance to any human being 
defined as ―normal‖ by the standards of his or her society.  
There have been some instances whe re a person has been deprived of the 
assistance of a parent or any other social and human presence. These beings are 
often referred to as feral people meaning ―wild‖.  
An example of feral people was the Wolf -infants of Midnapore who were reportedly 
found in a wolf den in a Bengal forest in 1920.  The infants, age two and eight, 
walked on all fours, preferred a diet of raw meat, howled like wolves and lacked any 
form of speech.  
(Adapted from: McKenzie and Bryden (2004:50), Introducing Word 2000 for 
Windows) 
 
Further Required 
(ii). Copy and paste the document to page 2    
(iii). Using the copy on page 2, center, bold and underline the heading and make it 
font size 24.       
(iv). Center aligns the second paragraph and make it all italics.  
(v). Italicize the source of the document and make it font size 8.  
(vi). Spell checks your document. 

--- PAGE 22 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 22 
 
     
(vii). Insert your name and index number as footer.   
(viii). Save your work as My Work.      
 
 
QUESTION 4.  
 
(a) (i) Launch a suitable word processing application, typeset the following 
document as it appears, save as ―TEEP 2016‖      
 
APPLY FOR THE TEEP 2016 PROGRAMME  
Top to form 
Welcome to the 2016 edition OF the Tony Elumelu Entrepreneurship 
Programme (TEEP), the flagship programme OF The Tony Elumelu Foundofion. 
 
Please note you can save your informofion of  any point in the process and 
return to complete your saved ap plicofion before the closing dat e to complete 
your application. 
In order to speed up the application process, prepare these documents before 
you start your application.  
Required documents are:  
 
valid government-issued identification 
 Official business registration  certificate 
official evidence of business ownership  
Official evidence of directors  
official consent by partners to apply 
 
(ii) Copy and paste the document to page two which you will use to  perform 
the rest OF the instructions.        
(iii) Using the copied work on page 2, Centre align the heading, Font size 20.5, 
and font style comic sans ms      
(iv) Apply appropriate bullets on all the required documents for the 
application. 
(v) Add a hyperlink ―will Ru n For The Whole Year‖  to the word 2016 
PROGRAMME 
(vi) Using a word feature, replace the word of with OF every where it appears 
in the document. It should be bold, italics and underlined.                
(vii) Insert a relevant clip art behind the text on page two   
(viii) Insert an end note ―Lets kick out youth unemployment‖ on TEEP found in 
the second paragraph.       
(ix) Insert a relevant clip art behind the text on page two    
(x) This clip should be 2cm and 3cm width and height.  
 

--- PAGE 23 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 23 
 
(xi) Add a footer as your name and personal number     
(xii) Print all your work  
       
 
QUESTION 5 
(a)  (i) Type the following information as it is: (use font size 14) 
 The time table below will be out by the beginning of next academic year. It 
should be copied and filled with relevant subjects. 
 
Senior Four Time table 2010 
 
8:00-9:00 
9:00-
10:00 
BREAK 
10:30-
11:30 
11:30-
12:30 
LUNCH 
2:00-3:00 
3:00-4:00 
Mon         
Tues       
Wed     FREE 
Thur       
Fri       
Sat    
           
         
         
                   
 
Note: The outer boarder 4point  
(ii) Put footer as your name and index number.         
(ii) Color ―senior four Time table 2010‖  ―BREAK‖, ―LUNCH‖, and ―FREE‖ green 
 (iii) Save your work as your name and personal number.     
(iv) Print your work               
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 24 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 24 
 
QUESTION 6 
(a) Open an appropriate word processing program and prepare the following extracted 
document from https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2018_FIFA_World_Cup as it appears:    
2018 FIFA World Cup 
The 2018 FIFA World Cup will be the 21st FIFA World  Cup, a quadrennial 
international football tournament contested by the men's national teams  of the 
member associations of FIFA. 
It is scheduled to take place in Russia from 14 June to 15 July 2018, after the country 
was awarded the hosting rights on 2 December 2010. T his will be the first World Cup 
ever held in Eastern Europe, and the first held in Europe since 2006,
all but one of the stadium venues are in European Russia, west of the Ural Mountains 
to keep travel time manageable. 
The final tournament will involve 32 national teams, which include 31 teams 
determined through qualifying competitions and the automatically qualified host team. 
A total of 64 matches will be played in 12 venues located in 11 cities. The final will 
take place on 15 July in Moscow at the Luzhniki Stadium.  
The winners will qualify for the 2021 FIFA Confederations Cup. 
Host selection 
The bidding procedure to host the 2018 and 2022 FIFA World Cups  began in January 
2009, and national associations had until 2 February 2009 to register their interest. 
Initially, nine countries placed bids for the 2018 FIFA World Cup, but Mexico later 
withdrew from proceedings, and Indonesia's b id was rejected by FIFA in February 
2010 after the Indonesian government failed to submit a letter to support the bid.  
During the bidding process, the three remaining non -UEFA nations (Australia, Japan, 
and the United States) gradually withdrew from the 2018 bids, and the UEFA nations 
were thus ruled out of the 2022 bid. As such, there were eventually four bids for  
You are required to: 
(i) Create another copy of the same document on page two without   retyping.   
                       
(ii) Centre align, and underline the heading of the pasted document.    
(iii) Apply a picture of football as water mark to the document.   
(iv)   Design the rest of the document to have 1.5 spacing and justified.                            
(v) Include Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia as footnotes on the word Luzhniki. 
(vi) Provide your personal number and name on the footer.    
 
 
 
(vii) Save your document with your name and personal number.            

--- PAGE 25 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 25 
 
(viii) Print the entire document.   
 
 
QUESTION 7 
 
a) Key in the following text as it appears using a word processing application of 
your choice and save it as ―Internet‖        
 
 
―Internet‖, ―world wide web‖, and ―web page‖ are no longer the buzzwords 
now. They are now a reality. The internet is the world‘s largest computer 
network and is referred to as the network of networks. One of the subsets of 
the internet is the World Wide Web. 
 
The WWW is based on three mechanisms that are 
Used to make resources that is 
 Protocols 
 Addresses and 
 HTML 
 
(i). Change the drop capped characters to font colored red.                        
(ii). Change text alignment to justify.                                                                        
(iii). At the top of your work, insert a heading, ―the internet‖,  centered in font size 
18 double underlined and in upper case                                                   
(iv). Using available word processing application present the following as it 
appears. 
 
QUESTION 8 
 
a) Typeset the document below as it is and save your work as computer 
performance. 
 
Computer Performance 
In order to compare how fast computers can process data, we have to 
measure their   performance. 
There are a number of measurements of performance. 
Clock speed, MIPS, FLOPS & Benchmark tests are all used.  Some are a better 
measure than others. 
The table below shows impact of each element on system performance. 
 Tactic  Effect on Performance  
1 Increase clock speed  Increase  
2 Increase data bus width  Increase  
3 Increase Cache memory  Increase  
4 Increase Address Bus  None  

--- PAGE 26 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 26 
 
 
 
 
 
(b) (i) Format the title as follows. All caps, Center, Bold, and enclose it in a text 
boarder.  
     (ii) Insert a new row between row 4 and 5 and include the item below and 
numbering  
 
Increase VRAM  Increase graphics performance  
       
    (iii) Change the table color boarder to orange                 
C. (i)   Highlight with a light blue color the word increase wherever it appears in the 
document 
(ii) Include a header and footer your name and index number respectively    
(iii) Include a Hyperlink at the bottom of the page in such a way that allows you to 
move at the  top when clicked           
(d) Print a copy of your work  
 
QUESTION 9. 
You are provided with the Science foundation college club time table. 
Using a word proc essor, you are required to produce the below time table exactly 
as it appears 
5 Number of processors  Increase  
6 Increase RAM  Slight Increase  
DAYS TIME & GROUP  
MONDAY 
MORNING 
 
LUNCH 
 
BREAK 
07:00-
9:00 
TUESDAY 11:50-1:00PM 2:00-3:20PM  
WEDNESDAY    
THURSDAY 8:20-1:00AM   
FRIDAY 1:00-12:30AM   
SATURDAY     

--- PAGE 27 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 27 
 
a) Feed in the blank time table with club activities of your choice. 
b) Make a print out. 
 
QUESTION 10 
 
(a) (i) Using a word processor, type the text below as it is 
Do not wish to be anything else, but what you are and try to be that perfect.  No 
problem can stand the assault of sustained thinking. The worst bankruptcy in the 
world is the person who has lost Enthusiasm. 
A man‘s success is not how much money he has made, but what kind of family he 
has brought up. Luck is what happens when prepar ation meets opportunities. The 
heart of learning is the will to try. 
 (ii) Copy the text you have typed and paste it below the first copy.  
 (iii) Format the copied text with double line spacing.  
 (iv) Insert an auto shape object, fill it with a light colour and order it behind text.  
(vi) Draw a thick 6pt line to separate the two copies. Colour the line red.  
(vii) Insert bullets on the second copy.                                                                       
 (vii) Insert your name, index number and ―©‖ symbol as footer.        
             (viii) Save and print your work 
 
QUESTION 11 
Use Microsoft word processor to write ten letters to ten students of Hodge ro ad 
Elementary School for the field trip as below. Note these students have different;  
Home addresses, address 1, City, State, Postal Code, and first Name.  
Hodge road elementary school  
123 Mingo Bluff Road  
Knightdale, NC 23456  
Wednesday May 1, 1999  
<<Home Contact>> 
<<Address 1>> 
<<City>>, <<State>><<Postal Code>> 
Dear<<Home Contact>>:  
This is to let you know that on June 3rdwe plan to take <<FIRSTNAME>>‘s class on 
a day long Field Trip to the Edison Home in North Fort Myers. The trip will be the 
culminating activity after week science unit where the work of Thomas Edison has 
been especially a focus of interest for the class.  

--- PAGE 28 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 28 
 
<<FIRSTNAME>> will leave and return within the normal time for the school day, 
so there will be no disruption to your own schedule.  
Please prepare <<FIRSTNAME>> a pack lunch for the trip. The restaurant facilities 
at the Edison home are somehow expensive and we have been unable to negotiate 
an acceptable reduced charge for school children.  
Please feel free to call me at 0776-222235 should you have need to discuss this 
matter further. Thank you for your help and support in this en deavor and 
throughout the year. 
 
Yours very sincerely,  
Donna Hendry.  
1st Grade teacher  
 
QUESTION 12. 
a) Use the word processor of your choice, to produce  the document below as it 
appears.  
ICT AS A TOOL FOR TEACHING AND LEARNING 
The term ICT stands for informa tion and communication technology and is defined 
as Diverse set of technology tools and resources used to communicate, and to 
create, disseminate, store and manage information. ICT has become a very 
important part in education delivery and management processes. ICT largely 
facilitates the acquisition and absorption of knowledge, and hence can provide 
extraordinary opportunities to developing Countries for enhancing the educational 
system particularly for the underprivileged constituency, and thereby for raising 
the level of quality of life of their people.  
a) Copy the document to another page.  
b) Double space the space in the document.  
c) Italicize and bold the word ICT through the document.  
d) Use Times New Roman font face and font size, 12 for the entire document  
e) Insert your name and personal number as the footer and header respectively. 
Center align them.  
f) Use mail merge feature to post the document to the recipients below.  
 
 
 

--- PAGE 29 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 29 
 
Table 1  
NAME ADDRESS COUNTRY 
MS AKIIRO GRACE  P.O BOX 23, KAMPALA UGANDA  
MR. ASSIMWE ANDREW  P.O BOX 19, NAIROBI  KENYA  
Mr. CADRE K. NAKIIR P O BOX 223 DALLAS TEXUS 
MS. KANYARWANDA STELLA P O BOX 9314 BWEYOGERERE 
MR KIBENGE KONKONA P O BOX 25 KAMPALA KYAMBOGO 
 
g. Save your work as your name and personal number.  
h. Print the work.  
 
QUESTION 13. 
Insert the table below  
Keith  45 86 85 
Beth  56 67 57 
Ham  42 78 70 
Tim  63 95 67 
Val  75 42 90 
Kit  50 63 76 
 
a) Apply a border on every cell 
b) Insert a row between Ham and Tim  
c) Add a column to the right to calculate the totals of students. 
d) Insert another row to represent the title for the records as ―Name and Marks‖  
e) Merge and centre the last three cells for the title.  
f) Align all the records in the centre.  
g) Save your work as your name.  
h) Print a copy of your work.  
 
QUESTION 14 
a) Type the document shown below exactly as it appears using Word Processor 
of your choice. Save the document as trees.  
Introduction:  
The term ―tree‖ is used in computer science to denote a particular type of abstract 
data structure.  
Trees contain data in structures called nodes, which are in turn linked to other 
nodes in the tree. Every tree has a primary node called a root, from which all other 
branch nodes in the tree  

--- PAGE 30 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Descends; In continuance with the botanical naming system, they  have no 
descendants, these are called nodes.  
Why should you use trees? 
Primarily, trees are useful for organizing data in a manner that makes it efficient to 
retrieve it. To illustrate this, is a picture of collection of data organized in linked list 
structure. A binary tree is made up of nodes that can have most two offspring 
(children). The root node is the node that is not a child  of any other node, and is 
found at the top of the tree structure. A n ode with no children is referred to as a 
leaf node. Nodes that are not root nodes or leaf nodes are often referred to as none-
leaf nodes. 
b) Copy your document to the next page.  
c) Apply styles and formatting to the copied document as follows;  
i. Font style to be normal 12  
ii. Font style should be Comic Sans MS 
i. Justify the whole text.  
ii. Chang the color of the whole text to be blue.  
iii. Insert header. The header should be your name.  
iv. Insert page numbers at the centre of the document.  
v. Create a folder on the desktop and rename it under your names  
i) Save your work into the folder in your names.  
j) Make a print out 
 
QUESTION 15  
a. Type the document below  
How the East Indies got their name.  
In 1492, Christopher Columbus, an Italian sailor, sailed from Palos in Spain and 
crossed the Atlantic Ocean to the West Indies. He was the first European to set foot 
in the new world.  
Root node 
Leaf node 
Figure 5 

--- PAGE 31 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 31 
 
Long before this time, people in Europe had become interested in explor ing the 
World outside Europe. In the Thirteenth century, the traveler, Marco Polo had gone 
from Italy to china. He even visited. Japan.  
Required  
b. Bold, centre, underline and apply font size 16 for the heading.  
c. Change the heading to upper case.  
d. Left indent the first lines of both paragraphs to 1. . .  
e. Insert the current date at the top of the documents and right align it.  
f. Make a spell check of the whole document.  
g. Insert your name and stream as footer, font size‘ 18.  
h. Make three copies of your work and create two columns in the passage and add 
a footnote as ―our school name‖ on the right hand corner.  
i. Apply 1.5 line spacing in your work,  
j. Save your work with file name ―Columbus‖ in a folder with your name and class.  
k. Print a copy of your work.  
 
QUESTION 16 
i) Type the following text as it appears:  
HP Launches the First African e-School in Uganda.  
Following nearly two years of planning, HP announced plans to launch the 
continent‘s first NEPAD e -School at the World  Economic Forum Africa Summit in 
Cape Town on 1 stJune, 2005. Representatives from the, Ugandan Government, the 
NEPAD e-Africa commission and HP signed a Memorandum of Understanding on 1 
July 2005 in Johannesburg, paving the way for the launch of Bugulumbya  
Secondary School, Busobya Village in Kamuli District as the first NEPAD e-School.  
On 18th, July 2005, less than two months after launch plans were announced, Flis 
Excellency, President Yoweri  Museveni of Uganda officially launched the 
Bugulumbya e -School, attended by approximately 5,000 country officials and 
members of the community.  
With a staff complement: of 22, includin g 18 teachers, Bu gulumya Secondary 
School provides education‘ to around 270 1ners. Set in deep  rural Uganda, the 
school underwent a r adical transformation as  a result of the cooperation between 
the community, the Ugandan Government, NEPAD and private enterprise. -  
Make the following changes:  
i). Change the font of the whole document to size 12.  

--- PAGE 32 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 32 
 
ii). Justify the whole document.  
iii). Change the line spacing of the whole document to 1.5.  
iv). Drop cap the first paragraph and give the letter a blue font color.  
v). Insert the table of the musical stars that entertained guests between the 
second and third paragraph and align it to the center of the page.  
Table 2  
Name  Gender  
Jose Chameleon Male  
Silvia Kyansunti Female  
Bobi Wine Male 
 
vii) Insert a merged row at the top of the table and type  
“MUSICAL STARS WHO ENTERTAINED GUESTS”.  
viii) Auto format the table with a pre-defined design. 
ix) Insert a footer containing an Auto text of Page X of Y.  
x) Insert a header containing your Index Number and Names.  
xi) Insert ® after every occurrence of HP.  
xii) Save your work as “Chogam” in a folder CHOGM. 
 
QUESTION 17 
Type the document,  
Uganda‘s stock exchange is quite nascent with the Uganda securities exchange 
(USE) formerly commencing trading in January 1998 of the East African 
Development Bank (EADB) bond, another fixed income security, the PTA bank 
bond is also being traded on the US E located at the East African Development 
Bank (EADB) building in Kampala.  
Uganda‘s clays Ltd is the company whose shares were the first to be listed on the, 
stock exchange on January 18, 2000 while a multinational, British American 
Tobacco Uganda (BATU) s  shares were initiall y l isted on the USE on October 3, 
2000.  
i. Justify the whole of the document.  
ii. Make three copies of the document.  
iii. Apply two columns to your document.  

--- PAGE 33 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 33 
 
iv. Drop the first letter of the paragraph.  
v. Shade the first paragraph with color blue.  
vi. Apply a header as your name and your class and stream as the footer.  
vii. Save your work as instructed.  
viii. Print a copy of your work  
 
QUESTION 18.  
You have been asked to send acknowledgement letters to people who have so far 
made contributions towards the prog ram. The letter contents are the same for all 
the persons except the addresses, names, and nature of contributions.  
Below is the letter to be sent and a table of people who have made contribution.  
NAKIIRS.S.S  
P.O.BOX 2333  
MBARARA:  
14thAug, 2009  
[ADDRESS]  
Dear [name]  
Thank you for your contribution of [NATURE OF CONTR IBUTION) towards the 
―funds for food‖ program.  
This project is its inaugural year but it has been a resounding success. The 
learners and staff agree that it should become an annual  event. The principal 
would like to thank you and hopes for more support in future.  
Thank you very much  
 
…………………………………………….. 
PRINCIPAL  
YUDA TADEO  
 
Table 3  
 NAME  ADDRESS NATURE OF CONTRIBUTION 
1 Alfonso Miguel P.O Box 245 Kamuli $300 
2 Lorene Mark P.O Box 245 Kampala 200,000 
3 Alfredo Manuel P.O Box 731 Kasese 30kg of maize 
4 Tim Howard P.O Box 245 Kamuli 10 bags of rice 
 

--- PAGE 34 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 34 
 
a) Use the appropriate method in any word processing program to make a letter 
to be sent to each person in the table.  
b) Save your work as your name.  
c) Print a copy of your work.  
 
QUESTION 19  
Type the text below using a word processing p1gram: choosing word  processing 
software.  
Word processing is using the computer to enter, store, manipulate, and print text 
in letters, reports, and books and so on. Once you have used word processing, you 
will probably wonder (like million others before you) how in the world you ever 
survived without it.  
As more word processing packages come on the market, choosing the right software 
can become very confusing. Nevertheless, there is probably a word processing 
packages that will serve your needs .As you begin looking, ask yours elf these 
questions:  
i. What type of document am I 
ii. Now processing? 
iii. What types of features do I 
 
Needs? 
Want? 
Document types can range from simple letters and memos to proposals, reports, 
legal documents, books newsletters, scientific papers, form letters, and so on.  The 
point is matching the features you need with the features in the software packages. 
For example, if you, write articles that require references, you will need the 
footnoting features; if you develop a newsletter, having the multicolumn layout 
feature would superscripts ( X2+Y2) and subscripts (A 21); and if you send 
―personalized‖ form letters the mail-merge feature is a necessity.  
A number of add -on programs are available to enhance the functionality of word 
processing packages. These include:  
On-line thesaurus  
Spelling checker 
Grammar checker  
Style checker  
Idea processor (outline)  

--- PAGE 35 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 35 
 
What you can do with word processing is limited only by your imagination and 
willingness to learn the system. Good luck in your computer -assisted writing 
adventures-now and in the future!  
(i). Insert the header the word ―Tips‖ on the left hand corner and ―word 
processing on the right hand corner.  
(ii). Bold the heading font size 22 — point underline and centre it.  
(iii). In paragraph starting with the ―document‖ bold the second statement.  
(iv). Make 2 the superscript of X and Y in expressing (X2+Y2) and 21 the 
subscripts of A in the expression (A21).  
(v). Insert bullets on the list of functionality of word processing packages  
(vi). Insert a footnote of your name on the left and page number on the right and 
corner.  
(vii). Use the appropriate format to replace the word ―notation‖ with the other of 
the same meaning.  
(viii). Indent the whole document by ―0.5‖ to both the left and the right hand side.  
(ix). Insert a clip picture in the middle of the paragraph, which begins with 
―document‖.  
(x). Save your work under your name.  
(xi). Print and copy your work.  
 
QUESTION 20  
Historical images of Apartheid in South Africa  
HUMAN RIGHTS. 
Apartheid consisted of numerous laws that allowed the ruling white minority in 
south Africa to., segregate, exploit and terrorize the vast majority: Africans, mostly, 
but also Asians and colored -people of mixed race. In white -ruled South Africa, 
black people were denied basic human right s and political rights. Their labor was 
exploited, their lives segregated.  
Under Apartheid, racist beliefs were enshrined in law and any criticism of the law 
was suppressed. Apartheid was racism made law. It was a system dictated in the 
minutest detail as to how and where the large black majority would live, work and 
die. This system of institutionalized racial discrimination defied the principles of 
the United Nations charter and the universal declaration of Human Rights.  
In 1976 the United Nations unani mously condemned the elevation of one of the 
―homeland‖, Transkei, into an independent state because it remained dependent on 
South Africans. Not one country in the world recognized the new state. In 1982 
almost one million black South Africans were transf erred to another country. 
Swaziland……… without their having any say in the matter.  

--- PAGE 36 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 36 
 
Ultimately, Blacks demonstrated, held strikes and rioted over such discriminatory 
practices.  
As a result diplomatic pressure mounted abroad for change.  In 1990, Nelson  
Mandela, who had devoted his life to democracy, equality and learning for all South 
Africans, was released from prison after serving almost 30 years for those beliefs.  
He was elected president of the African National Congress the following year, and in 
1993 received the No ble peace prize on behalf of all South Africans who suffered 
and sacrificed so much to bring peace to their country. On10th, May 1994, Nelson 
Mandela was elected South Africa‘s first black president, in that country‘s first 
truly democratic election.  
Required:  
i. Insert in the header the word of your choice on the left hand corner.  
ii. Bold the heading font size 18 —point, underline, Italy and center it.  
iii. Block indent all paragraphs by 1 inch in the left and right margins.  
iv. In the fourth paragraphs starting with On may bold the second sentence  
v. Make the body font size to 13 and foot style to Anal.  
vi. Justify your work.  
vii. Create two columns in the passage and a footnote of your school and 
name on the right corner. 
viii. Save the work as your name and make a printout.  
 
QUESTION 21  
Typeset the text below using a word processing program:  
ON DECISION TO BUY  
The members of the Exchange require that forward payment for shares be made to 
reduce defaults. On making the buying order, the cli ent will fill in client 
information, an order form and sign a purchase transfer form and then pay for  the 
number of shares he/she is willing to buy and the broker will issue him/her with a 
receipt. On the day the order is executed at the exchange, the broker then will send 
his/her buying client a purchase contract note showing the number of shares 
purchased, the price per share and the commission chargeable. A purchase 
contract note is a legal document that acts as proof of ownership until the share 
certificate arrives therefore it must be kept safely.  
At the same time, the br oker forwards the signed purchase Transfer Form to the 
registrar through the exchange. The registrar upon receiving your transfer form 

--- PAGE 37 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 37 
 
through your br oker issues a new certificate in y our name via the same br oker. 
This certificate is a legal document confirming ownership and should be kept 
safely.  
i). Set the page margin to ―1.5‖ to the left and right of the document.  
ii). Apply a header to the document which should among others have a name 
of the company in word art, address, logo and lines 
iii). Apply ―1.5‖ line spacing to your work.  
iv). Drop the first letter on each paragraph.  
v). Capitalize the title format it accordingly.  
vi). Save your work and make a printout.  
 
QUESTION 22. 
Use Microsoft word to the records be1ow  
Table 4  
 NAME  ADDRESS NATURE OF CONTRIBUTION 
1 Alfonso  34 KAMPALA 
2 Lorene Mark 12 MBARARA 
3 Alfredo Manuel 45 MBALE 
4 Tim Howard 54 GULU 
a. Apply 3 line boarders on the table.  
b. Bold and capitalize the titles.  
c. Insert three rows below and enter records of your choice.  
d. Sort the names in ascending order.  
e. Split the column for Lorena and enter another name.  
f. Split the row for Tim and enter another record.  
g. Insert a row at the beginning, merge it and key the title for the table  
h. Make print out of your work.  
 
QUESTION 23 
Make a headed paper of your company  
i. The header should include among others, the name of the company, address 
(box number, email address, phone number and fax) and date.  
NB: the name of the company should be done in word art  
ii. Apply a logo of the company in the header.  

--- PAGE 38 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 38 
 
iii. Make the company‘s Motto as the footer.  
iv. Apply a line at the header and footer with 4Y3 line style  
v. In the normal view, list -down the products or services offer ed by your 
company.  
 
QUESTION 24 
Construct the table below and answer the questions that follow  
Table 5  
Particulars Quantity Price 
Dry cells  30 120,000 
Threads  15 12,000 
Connecting wires  27 15,000 
Resistance wires (SWG 28) 27 20,000 
Torches  4 18,000 
Ammeters  50 20,000 
Voltmeter 50 20,000 
Bulb holders  50 2,000 
Cell holders (single) 100 4,000 
Concave mirror (f10) 40 5,000 
Concave mirrors (f15) 40 5,000 
 
a) Insert a column before particulars to number the particulars.  
b) Insert a column after price and calculate the amount  
c) Delete the rows for torches and bulb holders:  
d) Insert a row at the bottom to calculate the amount of the products.  
e) Make row height ―0.3‖.  
f) Save your work and make a print out.  
 
QUESTION 25 
Type the following text exactly a s it is and follows the steps as will be indicated in 
the text below:  
a) It‘s the answer sp oken by young and old, rich and poor, democrat and republic, 
black, white, Latino, Asian, Native American, gay, straight, disabled Americans who 
sent a message to the world that we have never been a collection of Red States and 
Blue states: we are always will be, the United States Of America.  

--- PAGE 39 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 39 
 
b) It‘s the answer that led those who have been  told for so long by so many to be 
Cynical, and fearful, and doubtful or what we can achieve to put their hands on the 
arc of history and bend it once more towards the hope of a better day.  
c) It‘s been a long time coming, but tonight, because of what we did on this day, in 
this election, at this defining moment, change has come to America.  
Required:  
(a) Insert a header of your document to be ―Barrack Obama victory speech‖ in the 
centre and the footer to ―change has come to America‖. This should be at the right 
hand corner.  
(b) Insert a foot note ―change for the better‖  
(c) Drop the first letter to cover 2 lines  
(d) Save your work and make a printout  
QUESTION 26 
You have been asked to send invitation letters to people to be invited for  your 
graduation party. The letter contents are the same for all the persons except the 
address, names and pledge.  
Below is the letter to be sent and a table of people and their pledge.  
St. Anthony Rest.  
P.O.Box 8125,  
Kampala  
23rd July 2009  
[TITLE]  
Dear [NAME]  
You are invited to attend a wedding ceremony of Salvador So renza and Isabelle 
royal scheduled to take place at St. Anthony restaurant and take away, Buganda 
road  
Please don‘t forget your pledge of [PLEDGE]  
We shall be grateful if our invitation is honored.  
Thanks,  
Yours truly,  
…………………………………………………… 
ANDRE CORONA  
 
 

--- PAGE 40 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 40 
 
Below are the pledges.  
Table 6  
 Name  Address Pledge  
1 Rosette  Bugolobi Cake  
2 Keith  Kasubi Wine  
3 Hyde  Kitintale Bride shoe 
4 Hearte Bunga Gifts  
5 Reina  Mutungo Gown  
a) Use the appropriate method in any word processing program to make a letter 
to be sent to each person in the table.  
b) Save your work as your name and make a printout.  
 
QUESTION 27  
Using Microsoft word, type the statements below and answer questions that follow.  
IRR analysis is generally used to evaluate the projects cash flows, rather than the 
income from the project that would be shown on an income statement. (Also known 
as the profit  and loss statement) Why? Because income on a P&L reflects 
depreciation, but depreciat ion is not an out -of-pocket expense. For instance, if 
revenue of $10,000 is reduced to $7000 of income because of a $3000 depreciation 
deduction, you still have the use of the full $10,000. So the cash flow figure of 
$10,000 is usually the more instructive one to look at. However, if you are very 
concerned ab out the appearance of your income statement (for example, if you 
anticipate putting the business up for sale or seeking major financing in the future, 
or if you are under stockholder pressure for increased income) you may decide that 
the income figure is more appropriate to use.  
How do you compute the IRR? The easiest way to use a good financial calculator. If 
you have one, or don‘t want to take the time to learn to use one, you can also use 
the present value tables located in Business Tools.  
Required:  
i. Apply line spacing of 0.5 to the document.  
ii. Justify your work to look orderly.  
iii. Make a copy of the document and paste to another page.  
iv. In the first paragraph, shade the first sentence with color blue.  
v. Indent your work by 0.5 to the left and the right. —  
vi. Save your work as investment ‗and make a printout.  
 

--- PAGE 41 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 41 
 
QUESTION 28 
Using Microsoft, type the statements bellow exactly as they are and answer the 
questions that follow.  
Tips for financing a Major Purchase  
Don‘t fall for expensive service contracts. Service  contracts that are pitched to you 
when you buy a piece of business equipment are often a good deal for the supplier 
but not for you. In most cases, the amounts you would spend on a service contract 
is wasted money. This is especially true in the case of generic equipment that 
normally carries a warranty any way if something is going to go wrong, it will 
generally do so in the first 30 to 60 days, when your warranty should cover the  
problem.  
There may be situations where service contracts are a good deal. For example, if 
the equipment was custom -built and expected to need regular maintenance in the 
future, if spa re parts and knowledgeable labor will be hard to find, or if getting 
repairs done immediately is extremely important to your business‘s operation, you 
might decide to purchase a service contract on a trial basis.  
Compare the NPV of the loan payments. If you have decided to purchase a major 
asset and are planning to take out a loan, a good way to compare the options 
available is to do a net present value analysis of your cash flows under the various 
interest rates and terms your l ocal leaders have available. Your cash flow 
projections should consider the loan payment  out flows  as well as their venue 
inflows that would result from your purchase or projects.  
Required:  
a) Format the title to, font size 18, centered, bolded with upper case.  
b) Justify the statements.  
c) Drop the first letters of the paragraph.  
d) Format your work to be double spaced.  
e) Apply two columns to your document.  
f) Save your work as your name  
 
QUESTION 29 
Use of DDT welcome  
Malaria is the biggest health problem in Uganda and in general, Africa. Its toll in 
Africa is the heaviest yearly. Nin ety percent of malaria deaths occur in Africa. It is 
responsible for over 300 million cases of accurate illness each year leading to 

--- PAGE 42 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 42 
 
deaths. On the economic front, malaria costs Africa more than $12 billion 
annually. It has slowed economic growth in Africa  countries by 1.3% per year. Had 
the disease been wiped out decades ago, $100 billion would have been added to 
sub Saharan Africa‘s current GDP of $300 billion this year.  
Malaria transmission occurs by mosquitoes moving to houses, entering during the 
early evening resting indoors and, at some point during the night, landing on 
humans and biting. During the act of biting the mosquitoes might acquiremalaria 
parasites and become infected, or if already infected, they might transmit malaria 
to another human.  
DDT residues on house on house walls can alter this sequence of mosquito 
behavior.  
The non-contact repellent action of DDT residues can prevent a malaria mosquito 
from entering a house. If the mosquito enters, in spite of repellent action, then the 
contact irritant action might cause it to exit before biting. If the contact irritant 
action falls then contact toxicity might still result in mosquito death, after 
prolonged contact with DDT - treated surfaces.  
 
Required 
i. Using a suitable word processor, type the above document.  
ii. Embold the title using Arial font type with size 14. 
iii. Ensure the rest of the document is in Times News Romans, size 12  
iv. Include a Header ―DDT‖ and Footer with a left adjusted value for ―today‘s 
date‖ and a right adjusted ―page number‖.  
v. Ensure both the top and bottom margins are set at 1.1‖ while both left and 
right margins are 1.25‖  
vi. Replace every occurrence of the word DD T, except in the title, with 
―dichlorodiphenyl trichloethane‖  
vii. Save document as ―pre-mock word processing‖ on the floppy provided 
 
QUESTION 30 
(a) Type the text below using air-appropriate word processing program.  
The Storks and the Urchin  
Of all the boy s in the town, the most forward in singing nonsensical verse was 
always the same one who had begun teasing the storks, a little urchin not more 
than six years old. The young storks, indeed, fancied him a hundred years old, 
because he was bigger than either  their father or mother and what should they 
know about the ages of children, or grown-up human beings!  

--- PAGE 43 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 43 
 
All their schemes of ravage were aimed at this little boy; he had been the first to 
tease them, and had been the first tease them, and he teased them still.  
The young storks were highly excited about it, and the older they grew the lessthey 
were inclined to endure persecution. Their mother, in order to pacify them, at last 
promised that they should be revenged, but not until the last dayof their stay in  
that place. Hans Christian Andersen  
(b) Copy and paste this document to the next page.  
(c) Change the heading to upper case, font comic sans ms, underline it with any 
dotted line and a font size 13.  
(d) Justify the whole document  
(e) Change the line spacing for paragraph one to 1.5.  
(f) Drop cap on two lines the letter beginning paragraph one.  
(g) Create a footnote on the word ―pacify‖ and it should have the statement ―to calm 
somebody who is angry‖.  
(h) Your name and personal number should appear as footer and in italics.  
(i) The name ―Hans Christian Andersen‖ should be crossed through.  
(j) Highlight the word ―scheme‖ with color yellow.  
(k) Save this document as ―prose‖.  
(l) Print your work.  
 
QUESTION 31 
(a) Using a word processing application of your choice typeset the following text as 
it appears and save as „flow chart” 
A Data Flow Diagram (DFD) is a graphical representation of the ―flow of data 
through an information system, modeling its process aspect s. A DFD is often used 
as a preliminary step to create an overview of the system, which can later be 
elaborated.  
In the late 1970s data -flow diagrams (DFDs) were introduced and popularized for 
structured analysis and design. DFDs show the flow of data fro m external entities 
into the system, they showed how data moved from one process to another, as well 
as its logical storage.  
There are only four symbols:  

--- PAGE 44 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 44 
 
(i) Squares representing external entities, which are sources or destinations of 
data.  
(ii) Rounded rectangl es representing processes, which take data as input, do 
something to it, and output it.  
(iii) Arrows representing the data flows, which can either, be electronic data or 
physical items.  
(iv) Open-ended rectangles representing data stores, including electronic store s 
such as databases or XML files and physical stores such as or filing cabinets 
or stacks of paper.  
Below is a sample of a data flow chart showing what happens when you make a 
phone call.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6 
 
 (b) Present your work on an A4 paper size, margin dimensions as 2cm top, bottom, 
left and right respectively.  
(c) Insert a heading DATA FLOW CHART  
(d) Centre the heading, bold and apply a text boarder.  
(e) Group your diagram to appear as one image  
(f) Include a hyperlink .in such a way that when you click, it takes you to the top of 
the document.  
(g) Include a text water mark as your subject combination 
(h) Add a caption to appear at the bottom of your flow chart to read ―Phonecall flow 
chart‖.  
(i) Italicize the word ‗data‘ wherever it appears and change it to color Blue.  
Phone call is placed 
 
Is ringer turned on 
Phone rings 
Voice mail picks up 
Does user answer 
phone Is ring # 
4 
Phone call complete 
N 
N Y 
Y 
N 
Y 

--- PAGE 45 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 45 
 
(j) Include your Header and footer as your Name and Index Number  
(k) Print a copy of work  
 
QUESTION 32 
a) Using available word processing application to type the following as is. Save this 
file as remote workers in a folder.  
Six Reasons Remote Workers Are Good for Business  
Inc.com, May 11  
When it comes to workplace flexibility, allowing employees to work from somewhere 
other than the office, or at time s other than from 9 to 5, can make a big difference 
in both productivity and worker retention. Simply put, working remotely is good for 
the bottom line on several levels: remote workers are more prod uctive, stay longer, 
and report higher levels of happines s. Office distractions aside, not having to deal 
with the friction of simply getting into the office is huge for some employees who 
are less stressed not having to commute.  
In terms of worker productivity, a recent Stanford study found call centre workers  
working from home outperformed peers in the office because they to ok shorter 
breaks and used fewer sick leaves. They also reported higher levels of happiness 
and quit less often. However, some workers didn‘t do as well at home due to 
loneliness so it‘s im portant to make sure remote work is a good fit according to 
each employee‘s personality. A Gallup study found that not only do remote workers 
log more hours, but also they‘re slightly more engaged than their office 
counterparts. Specifically, the research showed people who worked remotely part 
time were the most engaged due to their ability to enjoy the best of both worlds -the 
opportunity to have in -person relationships with others in the office, while also 
being able to reap the benefits of working from ho me, such as fewer distractions. 
Remote workers are less stressed and happier to contribute, making them more 
loyal to the company. The reasons are:  
Table 7. 
 Remote workers are more productive and stick around longer 
 Employees who work from home are more engaged  
 Remote workers are less stressed 
 You save money on real estate and utilities  
 You hire from a wider talent pool  
 You can reduce your carbon footprint 

--- PAGE 46 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 46 
 
 
c) Copy the work from page 1 and paste it into page 2.  
d) Insert the page number as page X of Y.  
e) Make page 2 layouts to be in landscape form only.  
f) Justify your work and insert footnote on the last paragraph: BYCHRISTINA 
BESMARAIS Contributor, Inc.com  
g) On page 1, make left and right indentation 6 mm and 17 mm respectively on 
paragraph one only.  
h) For the title, remove the underlining, bold the title and make it uppercase. .  
i) Make a drop cap as ‗dropped‘ in the first paragraph with orange font colour 
j) Print the entire file remote worker 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 47 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 47 
 
 
POWER POINT 
(ELECTRONIC PRESENTATION) 
A presentation program is computer program/application software that is used to 
display information normally inform of a slide show.  
It is important to note that communicating effectively to bigger audience s is a 
challenge to many people. However, the versatility of ICTs has played a big role in 
enhancing the ease and impact of the presentation process.  
Therefore, presentation program helps the presenter with a wide range of tools  to 
clearly structure his i deas and offer the participants with multimodal information 
that is so engaging.  
There are many areas where power point can be used, these include;  
a. Professional education. (work-related)  
b. Entertainment.  
c. General communication.  
Presentation programs can either supplement or replace the use of older visual aid 
technology, such as pamphlets, handouts, chalkboards, flip charts, posters, slides  
and overhead transparencies.  
A presentation program (power point) typically includes three major functions i.e. 
i. An Editor that allows texts to be inserted and formatted.  
ii. A Method majorly for inserting and manipulating graphic images.  
iii. A Slide show that is a system to display the content.  
Examples of presentation packages/software include the following;  
 Microsoft power point  
 Harvard graphics.  
 Open office presentation  
 Coral presentation  
 Lotus freelance graphics  
 Keynote.  
With presentation, texts, audios, graphics, movies and other objects are positioned 
on individual pages or slides in a given presentation.  
Starting Microsoft PowerPoint. 
To start Microsoft PowerPoint,  

--- PAGE 48 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 48 
 
Point on the taskbar,  
Click Start and then  
Point to All Programs  
Click Microsoft office, then you can select Microsoft office PowerPoint, a Microsoft 
power point window will appear.  
To create a slide/Title Slide  
Write in the boxes as displayed in the default slide layout.  
OR  
Change to blank slide layout and use text boxes and have greater flexibility in 
where you want working in different view modes:  
Terms used in PowerPoint.  
Slide views.  
1. Slide Sorter:  a window that arranges all slides in one screen in horizontal 
rows. This kind of view is useful to make changes to several slides at a time.  
Slides can also be re-arranged in any order. Changes may include;  
Rearranging,  
Deleting, moving, 
 Copying among others. All these are important in a slide sorter view.  
2. Normal View: it can also be called a slide view. A single slide and can add text, 
delete or modify the slide contents. It is the main working window in the 
presentation. The slide is shown full size on the screen.  
3 Notes Page View:  Allows one to view the Notes Pane better add and modify 
additional notes to a selected slide. Our text placed on the slide.  
Other terminologies used in PowerPoint presentation.  
4. Design temperate : This is a co -ordinate packaged deal. It is created so that 
even though different slide types can have different layouts and graphics, the whole 
presentation goes together as an attractive package.  
5. Transition : Slide transmissions are visual movements as one slide changes 
another.  
6. Animation and animation schemes:  these are visual effects applied to 
individual items on the slide such as graphics, tittles or even bullet point.  
7. Slide master:  this is a default design temperate/parent slide template  which 
other child slides by default take it‘s formatting.  All slides in a presentation are 
designed using the font colors and styles and graphics in a slide master.  

--- PAGE 49 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 49 
 
 
8. Ribbon: This is a strip of buttons across the top of the main window.  
Multimedia in PowerPoint.  
This is both audio/sound, video and pictures but in motion/movement state.  
9. Video/movies clips: Video clips are added to enhance your presentation. This 
can show authentication, movement or simulated movement, which makes the 
presentation more interesting. Movement is either by click of the mouse or 
automatic.  
10. Hyperlinks.  
A hyperlink is an element in an electronic do cument that links /leads you  to 
another place in the same document or to an entirely different document. Typically, 
you click on the hyperlink to follow the link. Hyperlinks are the most essential 
ingredients of all hypertext systems, including the World Wide Web.  
11. Sound.  
Sound as with video or movie clips, is added to enhance your presentation. If for 
example your presentation is about weather, as sound clip of thunder can be 
added. Clicking on the sound clip will activate the sound.  
 
RESOURCE QUESTIONS FOR POWERPOINT 
(ELECTRONIC PRESENTATION). 
 
QUESTION 1 
The four ―Categories of Computer Hardware‖ are input, storage, processing, 
and output.  
Required 
Create a Presentation as indicated below: 
(i) Slide One – Include the Title, your name, class and email address 
(if applicable). 
(ii) Slide Two Introduction notes to hardware and types of computer 
hardware. 
(iii) Slide Three – Outline Input Hardware. 
(iv) Slide four – Outline Storage Hardware and Processing Hardware 
(v) Slide Five – Outline. Output Hardware. 
(vi) Insert six numbers in your presentation.  
(vii) Save the Presentation as Computer Hardware. 
(viii) Print your Slides. 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 50 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 50 
 
Note The slides should: 
 Link to one another with action buttons. 
 Use minimal graphic effect. 
 Have your name and class as footer.       
 
QUESTION 2 
The three ―Categories of Computer Software‖ are Operating System, 
Application Software and Utility Software. 
Required 
Create a Presentation as indicated below: 
(i) Slide One – Include the Title, your name, class and email address (if 
applicable).     
(ii) Slide Two – Define the Operating System and give at least two 
examples.   
(iii) Slide Three – Define Application Software and give two examples. 
 Slide Four – Define Utility Software. Give two examples.  
(iv) Slide Five – Your conclusion.      
(v) Insert slide numbers in your presentation.  
(vi) Save the Presentation as Computer Software.   
(vii) Print your Slides.       
Note The slides should: 
a. Run automatically. 
b. Use minimal graphic effect. 
c. Have your name and class as footer 
 
 
QUESTION 2 
 You have been appointed a Public Relations Officer in the Ministry OF Information 
and Technology. Prepare a manually running presentation to be used to address 
the workshop OF ICT Teachers Introducing them to new changes in examining 
Computer studies in all Secondary Schools across the Country. 
Slide one:  Introduction:  
Title and name OF the presenter     
Slide two:  Aims OF teaching Computer studies 
Should include Aims OF teaching computer studies to students 
in secondary schools.              
     
 
Slide three:        Topics to be examined in Section C OF Paper 1. 
Insert the table below to show how each stage can be prevented 
 
SN TOPIC EXAM  SECTION MARKS 
01 Elementary Programming 
principles 
Section C  20 
02 Computer Hardware Section C 20 
03 Communication and 
Networking  
Section C 20 
04 System Start up and Section C 20 

--- PAGE 51 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 51 
 
Configuration  
05 Trends in Computing  Section C 20 
         
Slide four: Challenges OF teaching computer studies. 
 Should include why it is becoming hard to teach computer studies. 
             
Slide five: Solutions to the above challenges       
Tasks: 
a. Prepare a five slide presentation for use in your talk should manually run. 
b. Use minimal transitions and animations.     
c. With use OF slide master, In the footer section, 
 Insert your random number in the right Corner.    
 Automatic slide numbers on the left.      
 automatic date and time in the center      
d. Use a simple background theme colour.      
e. Add a Tabular slide to analyse the content in the table above   
f. Each slide must contain an action button to the first slide 
g. Use relevant graphics on every slide.     
h. Save your presentation as “changes”.     
i. Print a handout OF all slides scaled to one page 
 
QUESTION 3 
As an experienced student of computer studies, you have been appointed by 
your teacher to go and talk to the new S.Is about the subject called computer 
Club on their first careers day in the orientation week. The topic is “ICT 
Club”. 
(a) Prepare a five slide p resentation to deliver your content to the senior 
ones considering the following; 
(i) Slide one is a title slide and the Topic and presenter‘s details.             
(ii) Slide two contains a description of ICT Club at your school.              
(iii)  Slide three should have key benefits of being a member of the ICT club 
and what is expected from new members.            
       
(iv)  Slide four should have the challenges the club faces and the way forward    
(v) Design the fifth Slide with concluding remarks.                            
(b)      Let your slides have a fly-in transition affect from top left corner.        
(c) The slides should be able to loop continuously until escape key is 
pressed.  
(d) Apply appropriate background color of your choices.           
(e) Insert an action button to link all slides to the next slide.   
(f) Insert the current date and your name as your footer  
(g) Save your presentation with your ―index number‖    
(h) Print all the five slides on handout. 
 

--- PAGE 52 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 52 
 
QUESTION 4 
Ministry of Education and Sports is rolling out a sensitization projects named: 
―COMPUTER STUDIES FOR ALL‖. You have been appointed to prepare a four 
slide presentation saved as ‗ICT‘ including the following details:          
Slide 1: To include the topic for discussion ―Computer Studies for all‖, include 
your name as a presenter.             
   
Slide 2: To include advantages of computer literacy. Write seven (7) ordered 
advantages of obtaining computer literacy in Uganda.        
   
Slide 3: To include possible challenges to achieving computer literacy for all. 
Write about 7 numbered points.            
  
Slide 4: To include a conclusion to your discussion.           
 
QUESTION 5 
You are required to make a presentation to a group of web design  
Students about the following multimedia features, namely  
(i) Video.  
(ii) Hyperlink.  
(iii) Sound.  
Include the following information about each of the components 
(a) Create a presentation in which each concept (i) (ii) and (iii) is on its own Slide. 
Enhance with a graphic of your choice.  
(b) The first slide should contain links through action buttons to each other Slide.  
Note: Each slide must contain a link to the first slide, through an action button.  
(c) Include your name and index number on each slide and save you r work. (d) 
Print your slides.  
 
QUESTION 6 
Create a suitable 6 - slide show presentation for the advert of your favorite artist 
who is going to stage a, show at national theatre with the following items:  
(Remember it‘s a television advert)  
The slides should have the following:  
(i) Appropriate animation schemes to view the presentation.  

--- PAGE 53 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 53 
 
(ii) Appropriate transition for the show  
(iii) Clips and word art where applicable  
(iv) Appropriate design templates and back ground color  
(v) Apply sound where possible to enhance your presentation  
(vi) Footer bearing your name and, index number 
(a) A suitable title for the show  
(b) The date and time the show will feature Location of the theatre  
(c) Other artists to feature in the show.  
(d) Save your work and make a printout  
 
QUESTION 7 
Road accidents are very rampant in Uganda. Many people have lost their lives in 
road accidents. You are required, using presentation software to educate Ugandans 
about road accidents. Create four slides indicated in parts (i)-(iv).  
 Every slide should:  
 Use minimal graphical effects to make the presentation entertaining. a Be 
able to convey the appropriate message to the community  
 Run with a click of the mouse  
 Apply sound where necessary to enhance your presentation  
 Have your name and index number as footer.  
(i) Slide I - should include the title, your name and your school name  
(ii) Slide II - should include the actual causes of road accidents in Uganda.  
(iii) Slide III  - Should include the contribution of traffic police in the prevention of 
road accidents.  
(iv) Slide- Should the preliminary precautions to avoid road accidents.  
(v) Save the presentation as ―Road accidents‖.  
(vi) Make a printout of your work  
 
QUESTION 8 
 
Pollution is becoming rampant and a problem in Uganda and the whole World at 
large. You are required, using presentation software to educate Ugandans about 
pollution. Create four slides as indicated in parts (i)-(iv). Every slide should:  
 

--- PAGE 54 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 54 
 
a) Use minimal graphical effects to make the presentation entertaining.  
b) Be able to convey the appropriate message to the community.  
c) Run with a click on the mouse.   
d) Apply sound where necessary to enhance your presentation.  
e) Have your name and index number as footer.  
(i) Side I - Should include a suitable title for your presentation.  
(ii) Slide II - Should include the different types of pollution.  
(iii)Slide III - Should include the general causes of pollution.  
(iv) Slide IV  - Should include the effects, and problems of pollution to the 
environment.  
(v) Slide V - Should include the solutions to the problems.  
(vi) Save the presentations as ―Pollution‖.  
(vii) Make a printout of your work.  
QUESTION 9  
Agriculture is one of the  leading income generating activities in Uganda but its 
growth has been hindered by many factors including soil erosion. You are required, 
using presentation software to educate Ugandans about soil erosion. Create four 
slides as indicated in parts (i) - (iv). Every slide should:  
a) Use minimal graphical effects to make the presentation entertaining.  
b) Be able to convey the appropriate message to the community  
c) Run with a click of the mouse  
d) Have your name and index number as footer.  
(i) Slide I - Should include a suitable title for your presentation  
(ii) Slide II - Should include the definition for soil erosion and various types of soil 
erosion  
(iii) Slide in - should include the causes and effects of soil erosion  
(iv) Slide IV - should include the solutions to the problems  
(v) Save the presentation as ―Soil erosion‖.  
(vi) Make a printout of your work  
 

--- PAGE 55 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 55 
 
QUESTION 10 
Create a suitable 6 - slide show presentation for the wild life & Environment club of 
the parish with the following items: 
The slides should have the following:  
(i) Appropriate animation schemes to view the presentation.  
(ii) Appropriate transition for the show.  
(iii) Clips and word art where applicable.  
(iv) Appropriate design templates and back ground color.  
(v) Footer bearing tour name and index number.  
(a) A text slide with the name of the club.  
(b) A text slide with the departments of the club.  
(C) A text slide with the activities in the club.  
(d) A two column text slide with the names of the workers in the club.  
(e) A text slide with other related activities in the club. 
(f) A tabular slide with fifteen imaginary volunteers with their imaginary annual 
subscription payments.  
(g) A column chart for analyzing the highest payments per individual member.  
(h) Save your work as your name and index number.  
(i) Print your slides.  
QUESTION 11 
Create a suitable 6 - slide show presentation for the networking essentials with the 
following items:  
The slides should have the following:  
(i) Appropriate animation schemes to view the presentation.  
(ii) Appropriate transition for the show.  
(iii) Clips and word art where applicable.  
(iv) Appropriate design templates and background color.  
(v) Footer bearing your name and index number.  
(a)A title for the slide —  
(b) Definition of networking  
(c) Types of networking  
(d) Types of networking processes  

--- PAGE 56 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 56 
 
(e) Networking tools  
() Types of network cables  
(g) Advantages and disadvantages of networking  
(h) Save your work and make a printout.  
QUESTION 12 
A telecommunication Company MTN has appointed you a marketing officer.  
You are required to give a talk on ―MTN the Better Connection‖  
(a) Design 4 slides as follows:  
(i) Slide I should have the introduction of the topic.  
(ii) Slide II should have the content of the topic.  
(iii) Slide III should show the advantages over its competitors.  
(iv) Slide IV should show the future plan of MTN.  
b) Use different preset backgrounds for each slide.  
c) Include your name and index number at the end of each slide.  
d) Apply minimal animations.  
e) Save your work as ―MTN‖.  
f) Make a printout of work 
 
QUESTION 13 
As a forest officer in your home district, you have been‘ assigned a project to 
sensitize people in your locality about the importance of education.  
You are required to design four slides.  
a) Slide I: Introduction (include definition of forestry)  
b) Slide II: Content (types of forests)  
c) Slide III: Introduction (include definition of forestry)  
d) Slide IV: Content (types of forests)  
e) Slide V: benefits arid achievements of forests.  
f) Slide VI: Shortcomings of forests and conclusion.  
g) Save your presentation as FORESTS.  
(i) Set your slides to have suitable back grounds  
(ii) Include your name, index number on each slide as a footer.  

--- PAGE 57 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 57 
 
(iii) Set the slides run automatically.  
(iv) Insert a graphic on each slide 
QUESTION 14 
A Ugandan group is inter ested in your presentation skills to communicate an idea 
to the government about the need to conserve the forests.  
You are required to:  
a) Create four slides:  
 Slide one should have the introduction of the topic.  
 Slide two should represent the Group members‘ names, Addresses, 
telephone contacts, occupations.  
 Slide three should represent the benefits of the forests.  
 Slide four should represent the conservation methods.  
b) The presentation should have a continuous loop.  
c) Use minimal appropriate graphics and designs  
d) Creativity S  
e) Include the following on each slide:  
 Your name  
 Index number  
 Current date  
 Current time  
 Save your work on a diskette and name it ―Forests‖.  
QUESTION 15 
Create a presentation of not less than 3- pages about your school.  
a. The slides should be able to run continuously without external intervention.  
b. The slides should have appropriate but minimal graphics.  
c. Create a folder ―section 2‖ on the floppy (diskette) provided  
d. Save your work in folder section 2 End of term I PRESENTATION 2  
e. Make a print out.  
 
 

--- PAGE 58 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 58 
 
QUESTION 16 
You are required to prepare a project of 4 slides on CAUSES OF HIV AMONG THE 
YOUTH IN UGANDA.  
(i) The first slide should be your topic, presenters name and school.  
(ii) Format all your title slides (headings) to ―Algerian‖ Font style.  
(iii) Insert a relevant and different back ground on each of the slide.  
(iv) Insert a ―dissolver transition to run automatically every after 5 seconds.  
(v) Your project should have at least an image.  
(vi) Add an animation ―exit blinds ―on all your slides.  
(vii) Save your work in your folder on the desktop.  
(viii) Print out  
 
QUESTION 17 
You are required to prepare a project of 4 slides on WHY SECONDARY STUDENT 
HAVE FAILED TO PASS EXAMS. 
(i) The first slide should be your topic, presenters name and school.  
(ii) Format all your title slides (headings) to ―Algerian‖ Font style.  
(iii) Insert a relevant and different back ground on each of the slide.  
(iv) Insert a ―dissolve‖ transition to run automatically every after 5 seconds.  
(v) Your project should have at least an image.  
(vi) Add an animation ―exit blinds ―on all your slides.  
(vii) Save your work in your folder on the desktop.  
(viii) Print out  
QUESTION 18 
You are required to prepare a  project of4 slides on Causes  of road a ccidents in  
Uganda today.  
(i) The first slide should be your topic, presenters name and school.  
(ii) Format all your title slides (headings) to. ―Algerian‖ Font style.  
(iii) Insert a relevant and different back ground on each of the slides.  
(iv) Insert a ―dissolve‖ transition to run automatically every after 5 seconds. Your 
project should have at least an image.  
(v) Add an animation ―exit blinds ―on all your slides.  
(vi) Save your work in your folder on the desktop.  
(vii) Printout  
 

--- PAGE 59 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 59 
 
QUESTION 19 
You are required to prepare a project of 4 slides on MEASURES ON HOW TO 
CONSERVE THE ENVIRONMENT  
(i) The first slide should be your topic, presenters name and school.  
(ii) ii, Format all your title slides (headings) to ―Algerian‖ Font style.  
(iii) Insert a relevant and different back ground on each of the slide.  
(iv) -. Insert a ―dissolve‖ transition to run automatically every after 5 seconds.  
(v) Your project should have at least an image.  
(vi) Add an animation ―exit blinds ―on all your slides.  
(vii) Save your work in your folder on the desktop.  
(viii) Print out. 
 
QUESTION 20 
a) Create a five - slide presentation about the introduction of subsidiary 
Information and Communication Technology (ICT) for A -level in Uganda. In your 
presentation do the following:  
(i) Slide I- Include the title ―Report on the Introduction of Subsidiary ICT‖.  
(ii) Slide II - State reasons why Subsidiary ICT was introduced in Uganda.  
(iii) Slide III - Give the expected outcomes of studying Subsidiary ICT.  
(iv) Slide IV — List problems that are faced in schools offering SubsidiaryICT.  
(v) Slide V — Make a conclusion thanking the Ministry of Education, Science, 
Technology and Sports for introducing Subsidiary ICT to the curriculum of 
Uganda.  
b) Use appropriate transition for your slides.  
c) Use appropriate animation schemes to view your presentation.  
d) Rehearse time your presentation with an appropriate timing of your choice.  
e) Loop your presentation continuously.  
I) On the title slide apply a clip art of the picture of a computer.  
g) The title should have t he font size of 43.9, and it should appear different / from 
the other slides.  
h) All the slides should bear a footer of your name and personal number except the 
title slide.  
1) Apply appropriate colors for each slide.  
j) Save your work as your name and personal number.  
k) Print your work.  

--- PAGE 60 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 60 
 
QUESTION 21 
Assume that you ar e working as a Relation Officer in one of the leading Hotels in 
Uganda. Make a five -slide presentation with relevant data about the major areas 
you would focus on while campaigning to market the products in your Hotel to 
consumers or customers. Suggest an appropriate title to this advertisement.  
In additional, show the following on all your slides:  
(i) Pleasant text colors and background.  
(ii) Footer as your name and today‘s date in all slides.  
(iii) Images, sound and video.  
(iv) Automated animations and transition schemes.  
(v) Buttons for navigation to and fro slides.  
(c) Save the as your name and print all slides on a page  
 
QUESTION 22 
The School Nurse is planning a student‘s workshop shortly this month. He has 
requested you to prepare a presentation entitled Typhoid with the following sub -
heading. 
Instructions:  
a) Insert one slide (Slide one) to contain a title: Typhoid. On this slide, write your 
name as a presenter. Lay out your text to create better slide usage. You are free to 
vary-the font sizes.  
b) Insert a slide (Slide two) to contain a title: How Typhoid is spread. On this slide, 
list five possible causes of Typhoid. This list should be ordered  
c) On slide three, provide a title: Symptoms of Typhoid outbreak in an environment  
d) On slide four, mention the ways of preventing Typhoid outbreak in an 
environment  
Provide for the following.  
e) Insert relevant graphics and simple background  
1) Use today‘s date and time on each slide. (It should update automatically  
g) Include slide numbers  
h) Re arrange slide such that slide 3 comes first than slide two  
i) Entry animation of diamond for the first three slides and fly in for the last slide  
j) Loop your slides.  
k) Save your work as ‗Typhoid‘.  
l) Print a copy of your work.  

--- PAGE 61 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 61 
 
 
QUESTION 23 
Make a three page presentation for your school dealing with computer training.  
(i) Find a template (background) which is appropriate for this presentation and 
use it.  
(ii) Use your school name as the title on all three pages in this presentation.  
(iii) Type the following text in the first page. The schools postal addresses and its 
e-mail address. 
(iv) Use different font sizes to make it look neat.  
(v) Type the following in page two.  
 Computer classroom training  
 CD self study 
 IT training consultancy.  
(vi) Use bullets, according to the number of lines in the text and lay out the 
pages to make it easy to read.  
(vii) Create a slide show and save it with an appropriate name.  
A Complete Practical Guide to O‘Level, A ‗Level and institutions. Page 64  
QUESTION 24 
As health educationist, you are required to make  five slides for the community. 
This is to be presented in form of a slide show on health.  
a. Create a presentation on the topic “Malaria”  
 Slide I should contain the introduction and presenter.  
 Slide II should contain the body and introduction.  
 Slide III three should contain how Malaria is caused and spread.  
 Slide IV should contain control measures  
 Slide V should contain the conclusions.  
b. Use minimal effects in the slide. This should make the presentation entertaining.  
c. The slides should be quite presentable to the public.  
d. The presentation should run automatically.  
e. Indicate your name arid index number on the header.  
f. Save your file as Malaria 2014 on the on Local disc D.  

--- PAGE 62 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 62 
 
 
QUESTION 25 
The school has been assigned to make a presentation about its nature of studies 
being offered. As a result offering computer studies, you are required to: -  
a) Create a presentation comprising of 3 slides.  
b) Slide one should contain the body.  
c) Slide three the conclusion.  
d) employ good effects that will make the work impressive  
e) The slides should have a least three different transactions.  
f) the presentation should run automatically  
g) Indicate your name and index number on the header.  
h) Create folder on the desktop and name it in your names  
i) Save your presentation as ―Studies Millennium, in your folder on the 
desktop.  
QUESTION 26 
As an education officer, you have been assigned to sensitive projecting your locality 
on ―the importance of Education‖  
You are required to;  
Design three slides as follows:-  
a) Slide I should represent the introduction of the topic.  
The introduction should include the following.  
(i) Definition of Education  
(ii) Relevant information in respect to education. (History of Education in Uganda 
preferably your district, Village)  
b) Slide II should represent content of education  4 types of education) include a 
conclusion.  
c) Slide III should represent the benefits and shortcomings of education.  Include a 
conclusion.  
(i) Have minimal graphical effects, in the presentation.  
(ii) Include your name and index number at the end of each slide.  
(iii) Save your presentation as ―my slide‖  
 

--- PAGE 63 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 63 
 
QUESTION 27 
A travel agent has been invited to an internat ional tour and travel exhibition. The 
travel agent wants to market Uganda‘s tourism sector using a power point 
presentation of 10 slides, with the following.  
i. Title Slide with the company name of presenter a variety of slides detailing the 
tourism attractions of Uganda.  
Prepare a presentation for the agent as described below.  
ii. One title slide.  
iii. Two slides about eco tourism (forests, botanical gardens, etc.)  
iv. Three slides on, physical features mountains, rivers and waterfalls, lakes)  
v. Three slides of animals tourism (national parks, game reserves and wildlife 
centers)  
vi. One slide on hotels, travel transport.  
a. Your presentation should include at least three pictures, a uniform 
background for all the slides.  
b. Slide heading should be font size 38 and body font size 34.  
c. Put navigation tools on each slide to the ho me, text slide, previous slide and 
the end slide  
d. Save your presentation as Tourism  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 64 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 64 
 
ELECTRONIC SPREADSHEETS 
(Ms. EXCELL). 
Throughout the ages, people have always wanted to calculate. Tools such as the 
abacus were invented by the earl Chinese to help keep track of large numbers. 
About thirty years ago, students only had pen, paper, slide rules and mathematical 
tables to help them in their mathematical examinations. There were no such things 
like calculators and certainly, no personal computer.  
Calculators eventually became an everyday tool and certainly helped to speedup 
calculations and improve on the accuracy. Even then, they weren‘t really good  
enough to solve co mplex problems or deal with large amount of repetitive work. 
With advancement in technology, spreadsheets were developed.  
An electronic spreadsheet: is application software used to calculate, organize and 
analyze numerical data.  
Or 
It can also define as the intersection of rows and columns.  
Or 
One can also say that it is a piece of software used to work out calculations.  
A spread sheet can do a lot more than simply adding up a column of numbers 
spread sheets can handle financial calculations for a large business, calculate  
Probability or even other statistical information, do complex trigonometry and make 
colorful graphs and charts.  
Examples of spreadsheets applications include;  
(i) Microsoft Excel,  
(ii) Lotus 1-2-3  
(iii) Corel Quattro Pro.  
(iv) VisiCalc  
(v) Ms -DOS  
(vi) Open Office.Org Calc 
Components of an electronic spreadsheet.  
• Worksheet - A rectangular grid made u of rows and columns:  
• Database - Enable the •user to perform functions such as sort, filter, subtotaling 
and consolidation on worksh eet data. A spreadsheet file can also be saved with a 
.dbf extension to make it accessible from other applications using a db engine  

--- PAGE 65 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 65 
 
• Graphs - Visual representation of data on a chart.  
Advantages of Electronic spreadsheets.  
• They have large worksheets compared to manual spreadsheets.  
• They automatically adjust the result whenever a value is changed in a cell(s) that 
is referenced by a formula. 
• They have superior editing and formatting features hence producing neat work.  
• Easier entry of data due to typing aids such as auto complete, autocorrect, copy 
and move  
• It is possible to forecast or predict the outcome of changing values in one or more 
cells.  
• Analytical graphs or charts lets one provide visual representation of data from a 
worksheet.  
• Easy management of large amount of data using data management features such 
as sorting, filtering, data validation and subtotaling.  
Applications of Electronic Spreadsheets  
• Statistical analysis such as mean, standard deviation, variance etc.  
• Accounting such as balance sheet preparation, loan repayment, and mortgage 
and investments analysis.  
• Forecasting — What if analysis, solver, goal seek and scenario in most 
spreadsheets evaluate the effect of changing a value to achieve a certain goal for 
managerial purpose.  
• Mathematical and scientific solution such as arithmetic, trigonometric, rounding 
off and multiplication.  
Features of a work sheet (Work book basic features)  
Apart from the title bar, Menu bar, Standard toolbar and Status bar: found in Word 
processing, Spreadsheets have the following additional features.  
1. Formula bar. Is an area where a cell entry or a formula is displayed before being 
entered into the selected cell 
2. Worksheets. A worksheet is the area mad e up of rows and columns where data 
is entered. In Excel, a spreadsheet file is referred to as a work book which consists 
of one or more related worksheets.  
3. Cells.  A cell is an intersection between a row and a column. A column is a 
vertical arrangement of cells labeled A, B, C while a row is the horizontal 
arrangement labeled 1, 2, 3.  

--- PAGE 66 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 66 
 
Worksheet tabs. These are located at the bottom of a spreadsheet. They show the 
number of worksheets in the work book. Note that one worksheet may have several 
pages.  
4. Searching and sorting: this gives the u, ability to search the worksheet for any 
phrase, number or even o ther texts. It even makes the user scroll between the 
search results.  
5. Import and export:  spreadsheets can be transferred onto and off the mobile 
phone using a window explorer on the d. Spreadsheets can also be e -mailed as 
attachments, from within the spreadsheet application.  
A workbook window. 
Figure 7 

--- PAGE 67 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 67 
 
WORKING WITH WORK SHEETS. 
1. Entering Data into a Worksheet.  
When entering data item into the work sheet, the entry is displayed in the formula 
bar before you move to another cell. To place the content to the selected cell, press 
Enter key or an arrow key or click into another cell. Below are the three main cell 
entries:  
• Labels -alphanumeric characters or text that describes the content of a row or 
column e.g. names.  
• Values  - numeric characters 0 -9 and dates that can be manipulated 
mathematically.  
• Formula and Functions - while a formula refers to a mathematical expression, a 
function is  
2. Saving a workbook:  
To save a workbook:  
• On the office button ( File menu), click Save As. Alternatively click the Save 
button on the standard toolbar.  
• Select the storage location.  
• Type the name of the workbook then click the Save button 
Saving window for a work book.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3. Protecting a workbook  
To protect a worksheet or workbook from unauthorized access or modification:  
• On the Tools menu, point to Protection, and then select Sheet or Workbook.  
• Click check boxes for protection options.  


--- PAGE 68 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 68 
 
• Type a password, and then click OK. 
4. Editing a Worksheet  
Editing a worksheet involves deleting, copying, moving, finding and replacing  as 
well as spells checking.  
Editing cell Entries  
There are two methods of editing a cell entry:  
• Using the Formula bar — click the cell to display 1 6ntrf on the formula bar. 
Delete or insert required word or text.  
 
• Double click the cell to place the insertion pointer in the cell and then type 
or modify the entry.  
5. Deleting worksheet content  
To delete worksheet data:  
• Select the cell or range of cells.  
• Press the delete or backspace key. Alternatively select Clear on the Edit 
menu.  
6. Copying and moving cell contents.  
To copy cell(s) content,  
• Select the range of cells.  
• On the Edit menu or standard toolbar select Copy.  
• Click the cell where you want the content to be copied.  
• On the Edit menu click Paste.  
7. to move cell s content,  
• Select the range of cells.  
• On the Edit menu or standard toolbar select Cut.  
• Click the cell from where you want the content to be moved.  
• On the Edit menu click Paste.  
8. Inserting and deleting rows and columns.  
To insert a new column or row.  
• Position the pointer where the new row or column will appear.  
• On the Insert menu, click Rows or Columns.  
9. To delete a column or row.  
• Select the column or row to be deleted.  

--- PAGE 69 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 69 
 
• On the Edit menu click Delete.  
10. Inserting and de1eting.worksheets 
• On the Insert—menu, click Worksheet A new worksheet is —added into your 
workbook.  
To delete a worksheet.  
• Click the Worksheet tab.  
• On the Edit menu, click Delete Sheet.  
11. Find and Replace.  
To search and replace a specified range:  
• On Edit menu, click Find, type the text to search for.  
• To replace, choose Replace from the dialog box.  
• In the Find what box, type the word or phrase to find.  
• Click the Replace tab and in the Replace With type the word or phrase to 
replace the found word or phrase.  
12. Correcting spelling mistakes  
• Specify the worksheet range you want to spell check.  
• On the Tools menu, click Spelling or press F7.  
• On spelling dialog box replace or ignore the misspelled words 
13. Formatting a Worksheet.  
• Formatting makes a worksheet more visually appealing. In most cases we 
apply formatting features to numbers, al ignment, font, borders and patterns 
or shadings.  
• To apply these formats:  
• Select the range to be formatted.  
• On the Format cell menu, click format Cells. The Format cells dialog box is 
displayed.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8 

--- PAGE 70 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 70 
 
14. Formatting a Worksheet. Click any of the following tabs:  
• Number to apply number formats such as general, currency, percentage and 
custom.  
• Alignment to align and rotate cell entries, merge and centre cells across 
columns.  
• Font to apply font type, style, size and color.  
• Border to apply cell borders and outline.  
• Pattern to apply background shading.  
• •. Protection to lock cells and hide formulas. .  
• Click the OK button to apply.  
 
15. Adjusting Column and Row size.  
To resize a column width or row height 
• Position the mouse pointer on the border of the column or row header.  
• Drag to increase or to decrease the column width or row height. 
Alternatively, select a cell on the row or column you want to change then on 
the Format menu, point to Row or Column. Specify the row height or column 
width. 
16. Freezing panes  
Freezing panes makes selected data to remain visible when scrolling in the rest 
parts of a wide worksheet. To freeze panes:  
• For the top horizontal pane, select the row below where you want the split to 
appear.  
• Press Ctrl key to select a column to the right of the pane.  
• From Window menu, click Freeze Panes.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9 

--- PAGE 71 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 71 
 
 
17. Hiding rows and columns  
If your worksheet is too large to fit in the screen, you may decide to hide some part 
and leave only what you want to see at that particular moment.  
To hide rows or columns:  
• Highlight the rows or ‗columns to hide.  
• On Format menu, point to Row or Column, then click Hide.  
To unhide rows or columns:  
• Highlight a row or column on each side of the hidden rows or columns while 
pressing the shift key.  
• On Format menu, point to Row or Column, and then click Unhide.  
PERFORMING CALCULATIONS IN A WORKSHEET 
1. Using basic formulae.  
A formula is a mathematica l expression used to solve mathematical problems. A 
formula must start with an equal sign (=) while cell addresses are used as operands 
instead of values.  
a. Arithmetic operators.  
• These mostly follow the rule similar to mathematical concept of BODMAS. 
I.e. whatever is in parenthesis is evaluated first. Multiplication and division 
are evaluated from left to right while addition and subtraction are evaluated 
last.  
Summary of operators used to create formulae.  
Table 8  
Symbol Description Example 
/ Division  = A2/B2 
* Multiplication  =A2*B2 
+ Addition  =A2+B2 
- Subtraction  =B2-A2 
b. Relational operators 
A relational operator returns either true or false depending on the magnitude of the 
value being evaluated. Summary or relational operators  
 

--- PAGE 72 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 72 
 
 
Table 9.  
Symbol Description Example 
= Equal to  =A2=B2 
> Greater than  =A2>B2 
< Less than  =A2<B2 
<> No equal to  =B2<>B2 
<= Less than or equal to  =A2<=B2 
>= Greater than or equal to   
 
2. Cell Referencing  
There are three types of cell referencing used when creating formulae and 
manipulating cell(s), content: 
a. Relative referencing. When.‘ you copy a formula that contains cell references, 
say A3, the references adjust to their new location. E.g. If C1 containing a formula 
=A1+B1 is copied to C2, the reference changes to A2+B2. 
b. Absolute referencing. The reference is4ikde to a spec ific address and does not 
change even if the formula is copied to another cell. In Excel an absolute cell 
reference is made by placing a dollar sign before the referencing. $A$2, i.e. if the 
result in C1 is 170 if absolute reference is used, 170 will be copied to C2.  
c. Mixed cell referencing. This is a combination of relative and absolute reference, 
e.g. $A3 or A$3. In the first case the column reference is absolute while the row is 
relative; in the second case the column reference is relative while the row reference 
is absolute.  
2. Using in-built functions  
A function is a predefined formula used to perform calculations. A function must 
also sta rt with an (=) sign followed by the function name and argu ments. 
Arguments are numeric, logical values or text enclosed in parenthesis. E.g., in 
=SUM (A3:F3), SUM is the function that adds the range A3 to F3 which is the 
argument.  
Functions are categorized according to the nature of problems they work on. These 
include:  
• Mathematical  
• Statistical  
• Logical  
• Date and time.  

--- PAGE 73 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 73 
 
 
3. To use a function from any category:  
• On the Formula menu, click Function. Alternatively, click the fx button on 
the standard toolbar.  
• Select insert  
• In the function dialog box displayed select the category.  
• In the function list box, select a function.  
• Specify the function argument then click OK.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4. Using Mathematical Functions.  
• Commonly used mathematical functions are:  
• SUM () - Adds all the value in the selected range of  cells. For example, if A3, 
B3 and C3 contains 20, 50, and 80 respectively, =SUM (A3:C3) returns 150.  
• ROUND () Rounds a number to a specified number of decimal places. Zero 
rounds off the number to the nearest integer. E.g., =ROUND (49.769,1) 
returns 49.8, while  
=ROUND (49.69, 0) returns 50 and 70 respectively.  
• SUMIF () — conditionally adds the specified cells according to the set 
criteria. =SUMIF (A3:A1O, ―>= 1000‖), returns a value if, and only if, the sum 
is greater than or equal to 1000.  
• PRODUCT ()- Multiplies all the values in the argument. Eg, =PRODUCT (40, 
3, 2) returns 240.  
 
 
Figure 10 

--- PAGE 74 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 74 
 
 
5. Using statistical functions.  
• The commonly used statistical functions are:  
• AVERAGE () — Returns the arithmetic mean of its arguments. E.g., if A3, B3 
and C3 contains 20, 50 and 80 respectively, =AVERAGE (A3:C3) returns75.  
• COUNT ()- Counts the number of cells that contain numbers with in a range. 
E.g., =COUNT (A3:C3) returns 3.  
• COUNTIF - Conditionally counts the number of cells within a range that 
meets a given condition. E.g., if A3, B3, C3, D3 and E3 contains 20,50,80,60 
and 45 respectively then =COUNTIF (A3:E3, ―>50) returns 2.  
• MAX 0 - Returns the largest value in a set of values or within a range. E.g., 
=MAX (A3:E3) for the set values above returns 80.  
• MIN () - Returns the least value in a set of values or within a range. E.g., 
=MIN (A3:E3) returns 20.  
6. Using logical Functions  
The commonly used statistical functions are:  
IF ( ) - Returns a value or label if a condition you specify evaluates to TRUE and 
another if it evaluates to FALSE. Eg, if; A3,B3,C3,D3, and E3 contains a set of 
marks 35,50,80,60 and 45 and grades are to be awarded as follows:  
80 - 100 A  
60 - 79 B  
40 - 59 C  
Below 40 Fail,  
To assign a grade, use;  
=IF (A3>=80, ―A‖, IF (A3>=60, ―B‖, IF (A3>=40, ―C‖, ―Fail‖)))  
• AND () - Returns true if all its arguments are true or false if any argument is 
false. E.g., =AND (3+2=5, 2+2=4) returns true.  
• OR () — Returns true if any of its arguments is true or false if both 
arguments are false. E.g., =OR (3+2=7, 2+2=4) returns true.  
• NOT ( ) — Negates the unary operand. E.g., =NOT (.3+2=5) returns false.  
THE VLOOKUP FUNCTION.  
NB. It‘s important to note that this function is only applicable in Subsidiary ICT (A 
‗level) but not at O‘level. This is according to UNEB standards. But it is vital i f 
students at all levels understood how the function is applied. 

--- PAGE 75 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 75 
 
The V in V LOOKUP stands for vertical. Use V LOOKUP instead of H LOOKUP when 
your comparison values are located in a column to the left of the data that you 
want to find.  
THE VLOOKUP SYNTAX  
VLOOKUP: this is a function that looks for a value in the left most column ofthe 
table and then returns a value in the same row from a column you specify.  
By default the table must be sorted in ascending order  
Function  
VLOOKUP (Look up_value, table_array,col_index_num ,[range_lookup])  
Lookup value - The value to search in the first column of the table array. Lookup 
value can be a value or a reference. If lookup_value is smaller than the smallest 
value-in the first column of table_array, VLOOKUP returns the #N/A error value.  
Table_array- Two or more columns of data. Use a reference to a range or a range 
name. The values in the first column of table_array are the values searched by 
lookup_value. These values can be text, numbers, or logical values. U ppercase and 
lowercase texts are equivalent.  
Col_index_num- The column number in table_array from which the matching 
value must be returned. A col_index_num of 1 returns the value in the first column 
in table_array; a col_index_num of 2 returns the value in the second column in 
table_array, and so on. If col_index_num is:  
i. Less than 1, VLOOKUP returns the #VALUE! Error value.  
ii. Greater than the number of columns in table_array, V LOOKUP returns the 
#REF! Error value.  
Range_lookup- A logical value that specifies whether you want V LOOKUP to find 
an exact match or an approximate match:  
i. If TRUE or omitted, an exact or approximate match is returned. If a n exact 
match is not found, the next largest value that is less than lookup_value is 
returned.  
The values in the first column of  table_array must .be placed in  ascending 
sort order; otherwise, V LOOKUP may not give the correct value. For more 
information, see Sort data.  
ii. If FALSE, VLOOKLUP will only find an exact match. In this case, the values 
in the first column of table_array do not need to be sorted. If there are two or 
more values in the first column of table_array that match the lookup_value, 

--- PAGE 76 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 76 
 
the first value found is used. If an exact match i s not found, the error value 
#N/A is returned.  
Remarks  
 When searching text values in the first column of table_array, ensure that 
the data in the first column of table_array does not have leading spaces, 
trailing spaces, inconsistent use of straight (‗ or ‗) and curly (‗ or ―) quotation 
marks, or nonprinting charact ers. In these cases, V LOOKUP may give an 
incorrect or unexpected value. For more information  
 When searching number or date values, ensure that the data in the first 
column of table_array is not stored as text values. In this case, V LOOKUP 
may give an incorrect or unexpected value. For more information, see 
Convert numbers stored as text to numbers.  
 If range_lookup is FALSE and lookup_value is text, then you can use the 
wildcard characters, question mark (?) and asterisk (*), in lookup_value. A 
question mark matches any single character; an asterisk matches any 
sequence of characters. If you want to find  an actual question mark or 
asterisk, type a tilde (~) preceding the character.  
7. Using date and time functions  
Some date and time functions include:  
 TODAY () - Returns a number that represents today‘s date. The function 
takes no arguments. E.g., =TODAY () returned 09/01/2008.  
 NOW () - Returns the current date and time formatted as date and time. It 
takes no arguments. E.g., =NOW () returned 19/02/2007 00:02.  
• DATE () — Function Returns a serial number that represents a particular 
date. Ms  Excel uses year 1900 serial number 1. E.g., =DATE (107, 1, 4) 
returns January 4, 2007. Year = (1900+ 107), month=l, day =4.  
• HOUR () ,MINUTE() or SECOND ()- Functions returns the current hour as 
number 0 to 23, minute from 0 to 59 and seconds from 0 to 59 respectively.  
  

--- PAGE 77 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 77 
 
WORKSHEET DATABASE MANAGEMENT. 
Some database operations that can be performed on a worksheet database include 
data entry using data forms, sorting, filtering, subtotaling and input validation.  
1. Data entry using forms  
Data form allows the user to easily display and enter records into a worksheet 
database. To display a form:  
• Position the cell pointer in any cell containing data.  
• On the Data menu, click Form. .  
(You can navigate the records, add a new record delete or find a record.  
2. Data entry using forms.  
Data form allows the user to easily display and enter records into a worksheet 
database. To display a form:  
• Position the cell pointer in any cell containing data.  
• On the Data menu, click Form.  
You can navigate the records, add a new record delete or find a record 
3. Sorting 
To sort a list:  
• Select the range or click a cell in the list you want to sort.  
• On the Data menu, click Sort.  
• In the Sort by and Then by boxes, select the columns you want to use as the 
sort fields.  
• Select sort order either ascending or descending then click OK.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 Filtering  
Figure 11 

--- PAGE 78 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 78 
 
To filter is to display records that meet certain criteria.  
To filter a list:  
• Select a cell in the list to be filtered.  
• On the Data menu, points to filter then choose  Auto Filter or Advanced 
Filter.  
• Click the Arrow displayed in the column header.  
• Select a filter criterion.  
5. Subtotaling 
A subtotal is used to summarize a worksheet list to display grouped subtotals and 
a grand total. The list is grouped using preferred field. To create subtotals:  
• Sort the data in ascending or descending order.  
• Click a cell in the list then from Data menu click Subtotals. 
• In At each change in box, select the field to use for grouping.  
• In the Use function box, select a function you want to use.  
• In the Add subtotal to box, check the columns that contain values you want 
to subtotal.  
Click OK. 
6. Input validation  
To ensure that a user does not enter invalid data, set the validation criteria.  
An error message is displayed when data that violates this rule is entered.  
To set data validation:  
• Highlight the range of cells to validate.  
• On the Data menu, click Validation.  
• Click the Settings tab and select a validation criterion  
• To display an input message when the cell is selected, click the Input 
Message tab, type the message to be displayed and check ―Show input  
message when cell is selected‖.  
• Set the Error alert then click OK.  
7. Creating charts and printing  
A chart is a component of a spreadsheet program used to present data from a 
worksheet in a way that provides  instant visual impact. E.g. Column an d bar 
charts, pie chart, line graph, scatter diagram and area graph. To create a chart:  
• Highlight the range.  
• On the Insert menu, click Charts. Alternatively, click the Chart button on th e 
standard toolbar. 
• The chart wizard will guide you through the process.  
Editing and formatting a chart.  

--- PAGE 79 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 79 
 
• Click the chart to‘ select it. .  
• On the Chart menu, click:  
 Chart type to change the selected chart to a different type.  
 Chart options to set chart properties such ‗as title and legend.  
Location to place the chart in a separate sheet or on a worksheet.  
8. Printing Workbook Content  
You may print an entire work book, worksheet, chart or a selected range. To print 
workbook content:  
• On the File menu, click Print.  
• Specify the print options in the dialog box, and then click OK.  
 
ERRORS ALERTS IN FORMULAE & FUNCTIONS AND HOW THEY CAN BE 
CORRECTED 
Table 10  
Error Message Description Solution 
###########  The column is not wide enough to 
accommodate the value or a negative 
date or time is used e.g. = 
(2/4/2007) 
Increase the column width or 
shrink the contents to fit the 
column. Avoid using negative 
time or date value. 
#DIV/0! Division by zero or using a blank or 
cell e.g. = 45/0 
Change the cell reference one 
that contains a value nonzero 
in the cell. 
#N/A The formula or function uses a name 
that Excel does not recognize 
Make use of a valid argument 
or the correct type of value 
#NAME? The formula or function uses a name 
that Excel does not recognize 
Correct the spelling of the 
name. 
#NUL! The formula references an invalid 
intersection of cells 
To refer to two areas that don‘t 
intersect, use a comma (,) e.g. 
= (SUM(A1:A10,C1:C10)) 
#NUM! Due to use of invalid numeric values Use numeric arguments in a 
formula or function e.g. S 
Enter 1000 not Ush 1000 
#VALUE The formula or function uses 
incorrect argument or operator 
Make sure that referenced cells 
by the formula contain values. 
#REF! Due to invalid cell referencing as a 
result of deleting referenced cells. 
Change the reference in the 
formulae, or restore the deleted 
cells. 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 80 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 80 
 
RESOURCE QUESTIONS FOR EXCEL 
 
QUESTION 1  
 The information below is driven from MUFTI Limited from some few selected 
staff. The staff include JACKIE, KENT, PAULINE, UNICE, XAVIER, LEONALD, 
SONNY, CHRISTINE, PHILIPER and INNOCENT. They earn the following amount 
as basic salary respectively: 660000,  760000,870000, 580000, 600000, 
610000, 630000, 640000, 650000 and 555000. 
(i) Enter the above information using Microsoft Excel.    
(ii) A lunch allowance for all employees is 22% of their basic pay.   
(iii) Housing allowances are 62% of lunch allowances.     
(iv) All employees are paid transport allowances of 59,000   
(v) Compute the employees‘ gross pay.       
(vi) PAYE is 2.5% of basic salary.       
(vii) National social security fund is calculated at 18% of gross pay.   
(viii) Compute the employees‘ net pay.       
(ix) Plot a line graph of net pay against basic salary in worksheet 2.   
(x) Save your work in your name and registration number on the desktop.
  
 
QUESTION 2 
Study the following multiplication table. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Required: 
(i) Enter it into an Excel worksheet.     
(ii) Enter a formula to B3 that will generate for you the product of A3 
and B2.  
(iii) Copy the formula entered to B3 to other blank cells.    
(iv) Apply borders to the table.      
(v) Save the file as Multiplication Table.     
(vi) Rename Sheet1 to Multiplication Work.     
(vii) Put your name as footer.  
 
 
     

--- PAGE 81 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 81 
 
QUESTION 3 
The table below shows the common sales (in thousands) of liters of liquid milk of 
four farms in a certain district during the third quarter of the year 2008.  
 
 Wairaka Butiki Walukuba Bugembe 
July 93.2 0.4 55.6 78.1 
August 5.1 84.5 9.6 62.2 
September 40.2 7.6 98.7 44.2 
 
 
Required 
(i). Enter the above information to a spreadsheets application.  
(ii). Create a pie chart that includes a title and labels to represent the sales of 
the four farms in the third quarter of 2008.    
(iii). Draw a bar chart to represent the sales of the farms.  
(iv). Determine the total sales for each month.    
(v). Insert your name and index number as footer in the documents created in 
(ii) and (iii) above.      
(vi). Save your work as My Spreadsheet.     
 
 
QUESTION 4 
The following students sat for their term two examinations in Mathematics (mat), 
Computer studies (comp) and commerce (com) and obtained the following marks: 
John got 40 in mat, 20 in comp and 50 in com. Mary got 90 in mat, 60 in comp, 30 
in com. Tania got 75 in mat, 65 in comp, and 90 in com. Samuel got 55 in mat, 40 
in comp and 80 in com. Paul got 50 in mat, 20 in comp and 35 in com. Albert got 
50 in mat, 60 in comp, and 50 in com. 
 
(i) Enter the data given in spreadsheet. All names should be in column A.  
(ii) Use a formula to compute the total for each student and put them in column 
E.  
(iii) Sort the data entered in column E in descending order.                 
Iv  How many students got a D1 in Math given that a D1 was awarded at 75%       
(v) Put the titles for column A, B, C, D and E in orientation 450.   
(vi) Give your work a professional look.                    
(vii) Plot a bar/column graph for the students‘ marks in the three (3) subjects. 
Your graph should have appropriate heading and axis             
(viii) Include a header as your name and save your work as ―Senior four Exam‖     
 (ix) Print your work.               
 
 
 

--- PAGE 82 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 82 
 
QUESTION 5. 
Abili Secondary School received the following products from different suppliers at 
the beginning of term II 2017. 
Table 10 
1 ABILI SECONDARY SCHOOL 
2 Product Quantity 
(Bag) 
Cost per 50 
kg Bag 
(Sh.) 
Total 
Cost 
VAT Net pay Grade 
3 Sugar 20 225,000     
4 Posho 50 85,000     
5 Cement 70 40,000     
6 Rice 30 125000     
7 Millet 5 80,000     
8 Cassava 15 50,000     
9 Irish 17 400,000     
10 Onion 4 500,000     
11 Bean 60 150000     
12        
13 Tax =   18%    
 
(i) Use available spreadsheet application to enter the entire records in the table.  
(ii) Apply functions  or formula to  automatically compute: 
o  Total Cost of these products.      
o The VAT if its 18% of the total cost.    
o The Net pay per each product supplied.     
(iii) In column G, use function to position these products beginning with the 
most expensive one as position 1 and end with the less expensive one as 
position 11.  
(iv) Make your work look professional. 
(v) Draw a column graph to compare the net pay for these products.  Label the 
axes and title clearly.          
(vi) Indicate your name as footer.    
(vii) Save your work with file name ―Abili Sec School‖.    
 
 QUESTION 6. 
Below is an extract of Daily paper sales of one o f Red Pepper. Use it to answer 
the questions that follow. 
RED PEPPER WEEKLY DAILY SALES  
Table 21 
AGENT MON TUE WED THUR FRI SAT SUN TOTA
L 
COMME
NT 
New Taxi Park 25000 54000 54000 45000 54010 65000    
Mubende 
supermarket 
65040 68040 9600 65000 65000 54600    

--- PAGE 83 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 83 
 
Lugogo mall 65400 43000 53000 41000 40700 52110    
Highest sales          
Lowest sales           
(a) Enter the above data using any spreadsheet application your choice.                       
(b) Use appropriate functions to determine  
(i) Total sales           
(ii) Highest sales from Monday to Sunday       
(iii) Lowest sales from Monday to Sunday                 
(c) Determine the sales made on Sunday given that the sales on that day 
declined by 30% of those made on Saturday.  Be sure to use absolute sale 
reference.   
(d) Use a function to return a comment ― Good sales‖ and ―Bad sales‖ for sales 
exceeding a total of 200000/-                   
(e) Format your figures to have a suffix UGX to two decimal place values   
(f) Include a column graph showing the above daily sales              
(g) Ensure that your Graph is on a separate sheet with all attributes such as 
legend, title. Rename the new sheet Graph                
(h) Save and print your work.  
 
QUESTION 7. 
A school produced an end of term mark list for senior five using any spreadsheet 
program; enter the data into the table below.  
NAME  DIV HIST SUBMATH CHEM  PHY ECON TL AVE POSITION  
Ali  58 70 63 23 10 89    
David  40 6 47 43 54 76    
Hama  38 60 59 67 62 54    
Mary  60 65 48 73 60 34    
Abdul  25 43 67 32 28 21    
Julius  70 23 47 41 57 34    
Pius  34 37 56 45 42 54    
Moss  78 75 34 51 68 32    
Table 11 
a) Provide a heading for your worksheet as Cadet Secondary school, results for 
2012 and centre it with font size 24.5.  
b) Using appropriate functions, determine for each student the  
i. Total mark.  
ii. Average mark.  
iii. Position.  
c) Apply boarders on the data you have entered in the worksheet.  
d) Insert your name and personal number as footer.  

--- PAGE 84 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 84 
 
e) The sheet for the table should be name table.  
f) Create a pie chart using the average mark and include:  
i. The heading senior five term one mark, Cadet Secondary school.  
ii. Labels with the cart.  
g) Copy the chat to sheet 2 and name it chart.  
h) Saved your work as your name and personal number.  
i) Print your work  
 
QUESTION 8. 
The table bel ow shows examination results of senior six st udents of Mugo 
Secondary School. Study it and answer the questions that follow.  
Table 12  
 A B C D E F G H I 
1 MUGO Secondary School Six Science Class, 2013 
2 SUBJECTS 
3 
FIRST 
NAME 
LAST 
NAME 
BIOLOGY 
CHEMIST
RY 
MATH 
PHYSICS 
ICT 
AVERAGE 
GRADE  
4  OKUMU  DAVID  80  90  80  90  70    5  NAIGA  LILIAN  72  85  63  47  90    6 APUNU  JOSEPH  78   86  82  52    7  ODYEK  TONNY  78  87  86  82  52    8  WAISWA  MAX  30  25  58  58  67    9  LUBEGA  KARIM  86  56  47  78  82    10  KATAIKE  JENN1FER  59  85  64  55  85    11  KATEREGGA  JULIUS  98  45  25  93  69    12           13  HIGHEST VALUE          14  LOWEST VALUE          15  MEDIAN VALUE           
a) Enter the students‘ data above in a spreadsheet application as shown.  
b) Using appropriate functions, determine the;  
i. Average score for each student.  
ii. Highest score for each subject.  
iii. Lowest score for each subject.  
iv. Median score for each subject.  
c) Make your worksheet landscape page orientation.  
d) Name your worksheet as results.  
e) Use the relevant function to grade each student‘s average by indicating:  
 Very good if average is greater than 80.  

--- PAGE 85 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 85 
 
• Good if average is greater than 55.  
• Poor if average is below 55.  
f) Save your work as your name and personal number.  
g) Print your work  
 
QUESTION 9. 
Pic-Hill Primary School sco red the following marks in their Primary Leaving 
Examinations.  
Table 15 
Names Eng. Maths Science SST 
Karungi Hakhim 90  80  70  60  
Muziransa Saad 70  57  60  70  
Semakula Hamissi 40  45  60  50  
Muhumuza Umar  60  40  5.0  30  
Mbeiza Christine  70  80 78  90  
Isabirye Kalifan 30  60  50  45  
Mpairwe Joshua  70  6  V 50  40  
i. Calculate using spreadsheets the total mark for every student.  
ii. Calculate the average mark for every student.  
iii. Find the best performer in every subject.  
iv. Find the worst performer in every subject.  
v. What is the average mark in every subject?  
vi. What is the average total mark?  
vii. What is the overall average mark in the school?  
viii. Using the VLOOK, find students who scored above 60, gives them PASS and 
those below, FAIL.  
ix. Make your worksheet look professional.  
 
QUESTION 10. 
Enter the following data into a Microsoft excel sheet. 
Table 16  
Name  Department  Basic Salary  
Sophia  Accounting  350000  
Beth  Finance  200000  
Paula  Accounting  450000  
Aisha  Human Resource  365000  
Grace  Finance  150000  
Sarah  Management  460000  
Kate  Transportation  550000  
Namubiru Accounting  650000  
Lwanga Accounting  190000  
Hearte Finance  420000  
Trina  Human Resource  800000  
Lorena  Management  850000  
Morel  Accounting  280000  

--- PAGE 86 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 86 
 
 
Required:  
i. Add a column for employees‘ Age and fill it with figures of your choice.  
ii. Sort the department column alphabetically.  
iii. Extract subtotals for each department‘s basic salary  
i. If employees pay NSSF (National Social Security Fund), PAYE (Pay As You 
Earn) and tax which is 2%, 5% and 3% of the basic salary respectively, 
introduce a column for NSSF, PAYE and Tax and calculate the net pay after 
those deductions.  
iv. Select the names column and Net pay to for a clustered column with 3D 
visual effect chart and save it as ―Analysis‖.  
v. Save your work under your names in the folder you created.  
vi. Make a printout of your work.  
 
QUESTION 11. 
The school marks are divided into beginning of term (20%) and end of term (80%). 
Thus the total mark should be generated with a function that can sum the figures 
while considering the percentage weights.  
Table 17  
Name  Reg. No  B.O.T  E.O.T  Total Mark  Grade  
Keth U/001  86  85    
Beth  U/002  67  57    
Ham  U/003  78  70    
Kit  U/004  95  67    
Tim  U/005  42  90    
Val  U/006  63  76    
Pilly U/007  59  60    
i. Enter the above data into a worksheet.  
ii. Compute the total mark of the students.  
iii. Insert three rows after Kit and enter Au, Qarim and Natalie‘s marks.  
iv. Using the HLOOKUP, Assign the grade of the students whereby, from 80 and 
above assign ―A‖, 6079,‖B‖,40-59‖C‖ and the rest ―D‖.  
v. Change Val‘s end of term marks and put 15.  
vi. Apply an auto format in your work.  
vii. Save your work as your last name and make a printout of your work.  

--- PAGE 87 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 87 
 
 
QUESTION 12. 
A Primary Four class teacher of  Alokolum P.7 School uses spreadsheet to make 
analysis of pupils‘ results. Use it to answer the following questions:  
Table 18  
Name  Math (%)  Science (%)  SST (%)  English (%)  Lou (%)  
Monica  78  66  67  45 •...  89  
Jane  67  .77  70  65  77  
John  55  45  100  84  98  
Peter  45  56  82  56   Nelson  100  88  77  89  100  
Patria  82  100  70  87   
a) Enter the records in a spreadsheet application and arrange the names of these 
pupils in alphabetical order.  
b) Use function to auto compute the:  
i. Total mark of each pupil  
ii. Position of each pupil in the class based on total mark scored by each child.  
c) Return the total number of pupils who:  
i. Missed Lou examinations  
ii. Scored above 60% in mathematics  
d) Use H LOOKUP Function to return the name of the pupil with 100% in 
Mathematics  
e) Plot a column graph to compare the performance of pupils in Mathematics and 
English only. Label all axes, title and legend.  
f) Save the work as Alokolum and print the file.  
 
QUESTION 13. 
KB Computer Enterprises agreed to maintain an electronic spreadsheet to keep 
track of business books for the various branches country wi se. The following is a 
worksheet used to extract records from business partner‘s vendors.  
(a) Enter the following in any available spreadsheet software of your choice and 
save as KB enterprises.  
Table 19  
Branch Name Cost of 
Sales (shs) 
Sales 
(shs) 
Gross 
profit(shs) 
Expenses  
(shs) 
Reserves  
(shs) 
Net 
profit(shs) 
Remarks  
(shs) 
JCB_Soroti Branch  700,000  350,000   45,000  .    
KB_Lira Branch  400,000  70,000   
50,000  
•     
KB_Hoima Branch  200,000  95,000   2,500     KB_Muni Branch  300,000  175,000   10,000     KB_Wakiso Branch  650,000  320,000   55,000     K_kobOKo Branch  555,000  47,800   73,000     

--- PAGE 88 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 88 
 
 
Additional information 
 Reserves is 10% of Gross Profit 
 Net profit = Gross profit — (Expenditure + Reserves)  
(b) Use appropriate formulae/function to calculate:  
i. Gross profit for each member branch  
ii. Reserves for each member branch  
iii. Net profit for each member branch  
(c) With use of a VLOOKUP, use the following criteria to include remarks.  
 If net profit> = 500,000, then ―V.good Branch‖  
 If net profit >400,000, then ―Good Branch‖.  
 If net profit < = 300,000 then ―Dormant Branch‖.  
(d) Format your worksheet as follows  
i. Include an appropriate title on top of the worksheet well centered and bold  
ii. Format the figures in the sale column to 2 decimal places with 000‘s 
separators 
iii. Column headers should all be aligned to 45°  
(e) Use columns for cost of sales and sales to insert a line graph, keep the title of 
the graph to be PRODUCTIVE ANALYSIS, format it and place it in a separate sheet.  
 
QUESTION 14 
Create a Worksheet and enter the data below.  
Table 20  
Auto stores Year 1  
1998 
Year 2  
1999         
Year 3 
2000 
Year 4  
2001 
ATS 
Sales Revenue  32600  48000 62000  96800   Cost of Goods Sold       
Gross Margin       
Variable Expenses       
Fixed Expenses  000 . 6000  6000  6000   Net Profit       
 
Complete the table using the following information. 
i. The cost of goods sold and variable expenses for the Auto Stores are 65% 
and 10% of the sales Revenue respectively.  
ii. Enter a formula for each quarter to calculate the Gross Margin which is 
equal to Sales Revenue minus Cost of goods sold.  
iii. Net profit is equal to Gross Margin minus Variable and fixed Expenses.  
iv. Add a column called ATS that totals the figures from the four quarters.  
v. Draw a column graph for Net Profit for the four quarters.  

--- PAGE 89 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 89 
 
vi. Add a title ―Auto Stores and label the x-axis as ―Quarterly Net profit‖ and the 
y-axis as ―Amount in Shillings‖.  
vii. Save your worksheet as your Name and print.  
 
QUESTION 15 
Enter the data  bellow into a suitable application program and save it as ―Raw - 
marks‖  
Table 21. 
A  B   D  E  F   Student No.  Names  Telephone number  Test A  %  Test B  %  
01  Harriet  0712445230  53   43   02  Beth  0702512012  48   22   03  Harith O772652310  62   35   04  Bruno  0773652140  85   68   05  Hyde  0782416212  56   56   06  Hearten  0752316242  72   70   07  Pilly 0774512634  62   62   
 
i. Copy the work and paste it in worksheet 2 of the same work book. Name the 
worksheet 2 as ―percentage-marks‖.  
ii. Given that Test A and Test 13 are marked out of 90 and 70 respectively, 
enter appropriate formulae to calculate the percentage marks using 
―percentage-marks‖ worksheet.  
iii. Use functions to obtain the difference between the highest and the lowest 
percentage marks in Test ―A‖ in cell G21.  
iv. Calculate the average mark for Test B in cell G21.  
v. Save your work and make a printout.  
 
QUESTION 16. 
Create a worksheet and enter the data below: 
Table 22 
Name SSN 
No. 
Working 
hours 
Rate 
of 
pay 
Advance Overtime Overtime 
rate 
Gross 
wage 
Tax Net  
pay 
Paul  S00I  150  3000  -       Kate  S002  200  4200  1500       
Kim  S003  300  6000  4000       
Beth  S004  250  3500  -       
Harry  S005  240  8000  5000       
Paul  S006  200  5000  2000       
Rita  S007  150  4000  1500       
Sherry  S008  250  7500  3000       
Hearte S009  280  5800  2100        

--- PAGE 90 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 90 
 
 
 
In this company, month,  in case an. each employee works for a minimum of 100 
hours in case an  employee works beyond the normal hours, the pay rate is 
multiplied by 0.5. A tax of 30% is deducted from the gross income of the Employee 
and PAYE as 10% respectively. You are required to calculate the following;  
a) The overtime pay for the employees.  
b) The overtime rate.  
c) Gross pay.  
d) Net pay.  
e) Analyze the employees‘ wage with a siiitab1e chat.  
f) Save your work in your folder and also make a printout.  
 
 
QUESTION 17. 
The school did several tests marked out of 20. Use the information given to answer 
the questions that follow.  
Table 23  
Name  Set 1  Set 2  Total  Average  Grade  
Sophia  59  65     Beth  62  50     Paula  46  70     Aisha  85  68  .    Grace  60  49     Sarah  68  73     Kate  72  45     Tin  62  60     Val  85  60     Pilly 10  90     
a) Calculate the total mark for each student  
b) Calculate the average marks for the students  
c) Using the ‗ If‘ statement, assign grades to students using their averages in a way 
that, average above 70, assign a ―Dl‖, 65 -70, a ―D2‖, 55 -60, a ―C3‖, 50 -55, a ―C4‖, 
45-49, a ―C5‖, the rest, an ―F‖.  
d) Differentiate those who have passed from those who have failed in a way that if a 
person has average above 50, then that person has passed, otherwise, failed.  
e) Save your work in a folder and also make a printout.  
 

--- PAGE 91 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 91 
 
QUESTION 18. 
Enter the following data into a Microsoft Excel sheet.  
Table 24 
Name  Department  Basic Salary  
Sophia  Transport  350000  
Beth  Finance  560000  
Paula  Accounts  700000  
Aisha  Human Resource  450000  
Grace  Finance  492000  
Sarah  Accounts  646000  
Kate  Finance  500000  
Harry  Human resource  490000  
Kate  Transport  380000  
Hearte Human resource  612000  
Trina  Transport  280000  
Lorena  Accounts  680000  
Morel  Finance 654000  
Required: 
i. Add a column for employees‘ age and fill it with the figures of your choice.  
ii. Sort the department column alphabetically.  
iii. Extract subtotals for each department‘s basic salary.  
iv. Copy your work and paste it on sheet 2 to continue with the rest of the 
questions.  
v. If employees pay NSSF (National Social Security Fund), PAYE (Pay As You 
Earn) and tax which is 2%, 3% and 2% of basic  salary respectively, 
introduce a column for NSSF, PAYE and Tax and calculate the net pay after 
those deductions.  
vi. Select the names column and Net pay to form a clustered column with 3 - D 
visual effect chart and save it as ―Analysis‖.  
vii. Save your work under your names in the folder you created.  
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 92 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 92 
 
QUESTION 19.  
Using any spreadsheet, type the following information  
Table 25  
 A B C D E F 
1 CITY  SALES  EXPENDITURE  INCOME/LOSS  COMMISSION   
2  Delhi  15111  13400     
3  Chandigarh  26100  24050     
4 Patna  17270  15670     
5  5aipur  19800  21500     
6  Agra  29400  25600     
7  Total       
8  PERCENT  10      
 
i. Calculate the income/loss for each of the cities.  
ii. Compute the commission for each of the regions as the percentage of 
income, where percentage is as given in cell H2.  
iii. Save the file under the name sales projection.  
iv. Print the worksheet.  
 
QUESTION 20.  
A farmer‘s income and expenditure is shown in the spreadsheet below;  
Table 26 
 A  B  C D E  
1  RATES      2   Increase  3%    3  .  Decrease  2.5%    4       5       
6  INCOME  Maize sales  2000  
‗    
7   Wheat sales  25000    8   Mi1i sales  12500  ‗   9       10   Total Income   37500   11 EXPENDITURE      12   Fertilizer  16000    13   Labor  10000    14   Transport  8000    15       
16   
Total  
Expenditure   34000   
17       18  PROFIT    23500   19   .      

--- PAGE 93 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 93 
 
If his expenditure is decreased by 2.5% and income goes up by 3%,  
a) Calculate the figures in cells E10 and E16 to find the total income expenditure in 
each case.  
b) Calculate the figures in cell E 18 to find the profit.  
c) Calculate the new expenditure in cells F12, F13 and F14.  
d) Calculate the new income in cells F6, F7 and F8.  
e) Calculate the new profit in cell 018.  
f) Save your work.  
g) Print your work.  
 
QUESTION 21 
The following students sat for their term one examination in Math (mat),  
Computer studies (comp), commerce  (corn) and History (hist) and obtained the 
following marks.  
Abbey got 50 in mat, 30 in comp, 20 in corn and 70 in hist. Obbo got 60 inmat, 56 
in comp, 40 in com and 55 in hist. Kato got 8O in mat, 75 in comp, 39 in co m and 
49 in hist. Val got 49 in mat, 50 in comp, 86 in co m and 74 in hist. Ham got 60 in 
mat, 45 in comp, 48 in co m and 90 in hist. Kim got 62 in mat,53  in comp, 50 in 
com and 80 in hist. Tim got 29 in mat, 60 in comp, 49 incom and 78 in hist.  
i. Enter the data given in a spreadsheet: All names should be in column A.  
ii. Use a formula to complete the total fo r each student and put them in column 
F 
iii. Sort the data entered in column F in descending order.  
iv. Put the titles for column A, B, C, D; E and Fin orientation 90°.  
v. Boarder your work to give it a professional look.  
vi. Draw a bar/column graph for the students‘ marks in the four (4) subjects.  
vii. Save your work as your name and index number.  
viii. Print your name.  
 
QUESTION 22.  
The school marks are divided into Beginning of term (30%) and End of term (70%). 
Thus the total mark should be generated with a function that can sum the figures 
while considering the percentage weights.  
Table 27  
Name Reg. No B.O.T E.O.T  T/MARK Grade 
Keith U/0O1 86 85   
Beth U/002 - 67 57   
Ham U/003 78  70   
Kit U/004 95 67   
Tim U/005 42 90   
Val U/006 63 76   
Pilly U/007 59 60   

--- PAGE 94 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 94 
 
A. Enter the above data into a worksheet  
a. Compute the total mark for the students  
b. Insert three rows after kit and enter Au, Quarim and Natalie‘s marks.  
c. Assign the grade for the students whereby, from 80 -100 assign A, 60-
79 ―B‖, 40-39, ―C‖ and 20-39, ―D‖.  
d. Change Val‘s end of term marks and put 15.  
e. Apply an auto format in your work.  
f. Save your work as your last name.  
 
QUESTION 23.  
Create a spread sheet of the data above, starting with the item title cell A3 and save 
as “stationery 1” 
 A B C D E F 
1 Item  Opening  
stock(O)  
Closing  
stock(C)  
Quantities 
sold(Q)  
Selling 
price (S)  
Value of 
sales(V)  
2  Note books  200  120   1500   3  Printing paper  400 160   8000   4  Clip files  170  80   200   5  Box files  100  0   2500   6  Diaries  95  30   1800   
7  Counter books  600  
 150   
5000  
  
     Total value 
of sales  
 
i. Put the appropriate formula in cell D3 to compute the amount sold.  
ii. Copy it to the rest of the column  
iii. Put the appropriate formula in cell F3 to compute v.  
iv. Sum up column F to find the total value of sales.  
v. Use the graph function to draw a bar graph of sa les for the various 
items .Write your name and index number below the graph.  
vi. Save the graph as My graph  
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 95 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 95 
 
QUESTION 24 
Enter the following data into a Microsoft excel sheet  
Table 29 
Name  Department  Basic Salary  
Ali Accounting  350000  
Bob  Finance  200000  
Cathy  Accounting  450000  
Din  Human Resource  365000  
Eddy  Finance  150000  
Felly  Management  360000  
Gill  Transportation  520000  
Hum  Accounting  720000  
Ethan  Accounting  170000  
Jessie  Finance  360000  
Kit  Human Resource  700000  
Lass  Management  700000  
Melisa  Accounting  150000  
Required  
i. Add a column for employees Age and fill it with figures of your choice  
ii. Sort the department column alphabetically  
iii. Extract subtotals for each department‘s basic salary  
iv. If employees pay NSSF (National Social Security Fund) and Payee (Pay as 
You Earn) which is 3% and 4% of basic salary respectively introduce a 
column for NSSF and Payee and calculate the net pay after th ose 
deductions.  
v. Select the names column an d Net pay to form a clustered column with 3 -D 
Visual effect chart.  
vi. Save your work as your name.  
 
QUESTION 25 
The following members of twegatte saving and cooperative society to OK loans from 
gold trust bank. They were charged a handling fee of 5% and an interest  
of 15%of theloan.  
Name Loan (Ush) Period 
Kato sulaiman 500,000 2 years 
Magembe Ivan 750,000 3 years 
Nababi Justine 350,000 2 years 
Kapere Douglas 1,250,000 6 months 
Sagala Martin 900,000 1.5 years 
Tomusange David 2,150,000 5 years 

--- PAGE 96 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 96 
 
i. Create a work sheet with column headings NAMES, AMOUNT, PERIOD, 
HANDLING FEES, INTEREST, and TOTAL PAYMENT.  
ii. Enter the above data.  
iii. Using relevant formulae calculate the Handling fees, interest and total  
payment for Kato Sulaiman 
iv. Using the copy and paste feature complete calculations for all the members.  
v. Create a 3-D column graph to show the Total payment of each member.  
vi. Save work sheet as <twegatte> in your folder,  
QUESTION 26.  
Table 30  
Enter the following data into a Microsoft excel sheet  
Name  Department  Basic Salary  
Sopiia Accounting  350000  
Beth  Finance  200000  
Paula  Accounting  450000  
Aisha  Human Resource  365000  
Grace  Finance  150000  
Sarah  Management  460000  
-Kate  Transportation —  550000  
Namubiru Accounting  650000  
Lwanga Accounting  190000  
Hearte Finance  420000  
Trina  Human Resource  800000  
Lorena  Management  850000  
Morel  Accounting  280000  
Required:  
i. Add a column for employees‘ Age and fill it with figures of your choice.  
ii. Sort the department column alphabetically.  
iii. Extract subtotals for each department‘s basic salary  
iv. If employees pay NSSF (National Social Security Fund), PAYE (Pay As You 
Earn) and tax which is 2°/9, 5%, and 3% of the basic salary respectively,  
v. Introduce a column for NSSF, PAYE and Tax and calculate the net pay after 
those deductions. 
vi. Select the names column and Net pay to for a clustered column with 3D 
visual effect chart and save it as ―Analysis‖.  
vii. Save your work under your names in the folder you created.  
viii. Make a printout of your work.  

--- PAGE 97 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 97 
 
QUESTION 27.  
The school marks are divided into beginning of term (20%) and end of term (80%). 
Thus the total mark should be generated with a function that can sum the figures 
while considering the percentage weights.  
Table 31 
Name  Reg. No  B.O.T  E.O.T  Total Mark  Grade  
Keith  U/00l 86 85   
Beth  U/002  67  57    Ham  U/003  78  70    Kit  U/004  95  67   .  
Tim  U/005  42  90    Val  U/006  63  76    Pilly U/007  59  60    
i. Enter the above data into a worksheet.  
ii. Compute the total mark of the students.  
iii. Insert three rows after Kit and enter All, Qarim and Natalie‘s marks.  
iv. Assign the grade of the students whereby, from 80 and above assign ―A‖, 60 -
79,‖B‖, 40-59‖C‖ and the rest ―D‖.  
v. Change Val‘s end of term marks and put 15.  
vi. Apply an auto format in your work.  
vii. Save your work as your last name and make a printout of your work.  
 
QUESTION 28.  
Enter the data bellow into a suitable application program and save it as “Raw- 
marks” 
Table 32 
A B C D E F 0 
Student  
number 
Names Telephone  
number 
Test  
A 
% Test B  
L 
% 
01 Harriet  0712445230 53  43  
02 Beth  0702512012 48  22  03 Harith 0772652310 62  35  
04 Bruno  0773652140 85  68  05 Hyde  0782416212 56  56  06 Hearte 0752316242 72  70  07 Pilly 0774512634 62  62   
i. Copy the work and paste it in worksheet 2 of the same work book. Name the 
worksheet 2 as “percentage-marks”. 
ii. Given that Test A and Test B are marked out of 90 and 70 respectively, enter 
appropriate formulae to calculate the percentage marks using “percentage-
marks” worksheet. 

--- PAGE 98 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 98 
 
iii. Use functions to obtain the difference between the highest and the lowest 
percentage marks in Test ―A‖ in cell E21 
iv. Calculate the average mark for Test B in cell G2 1.  
v. Save your work and make a printout.  
QUESTION 29.  
Create the spreadsheet below and save it as Student-marks.  
Table 33  
STUDENT NAME  MATHS  ENGLISH  BIOLOGY  
HadijahKadondi 67   74  71  
LutaleAcram 58  65  56.  
AhumuzaShamsa 81  69  70  
KusiimaNasur 45  50  49  
Komugisha Sandra  78  76  68  
MaskaHairat 34  47  65  
LutakomeBasam 56  56  56.  
BalukuAiman 85  88  69  
NajjingoSohpia 60  .55  46  
Enter the formulae to complete the following:  
i. The marks for each student.  
ii. The average mark for each subject.  
iii. The highest mark for each subject.  
iv. The lowest mark for each subject.  
v. The standard deviation per student.  
 
QUESTION 30.  
Hill Primary School scored the following marks in their Primary Leaving 
Examinations.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
i. Calculate using spreadsheets the total mark for every student.  
ii. Calculate the average mark for every student.  
iii. Find the best performer in every subject.  
iii. Find the worst performer in every subject.  
Names  Eng.  Math  Sci SST 
KarungiH  90  80  70 60 
MuziransaSaad 70  57  60  70 
SemakulaHam 40  45  60 50 
Hamza Umar  60  40 50 30 
Christine yuda 70  80  78  90 
IsabiryeKa1ifan  30  60  50  45 
MpairweJass 70  60  50  40 

--- PAGE 99 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 99 
 
iv. What is the average mark in every subject?  
v. What is the average total mark?  
vi. What is the overall average mark in the school?  
vii. Using the IF functions, find students who scored above PASS and those 
below, FAIL.  
viii. Make your worksheet look professional.  
QUESTION 31.  
The following spreadsheet shows the profit or loss on sales at an ice - cream stall 
during a four week period.  
Table 35  
 A B C D E F 
1  ICE-CREAM STALL 
2   Cost price (Ug)      
3 Ice  
cream  
500      
4   800      
5        
6   Ice-cream 
Sales  
(Ug)  
Orange 
juice sales 
(Ug)  
Income 
(Ug)  
Expenses 
(Ug)  
.  
Profit/Loss  
(Ug)  
7  Week 1  3000  400  980,000  900,000  Profit  
8  Week 2  2500  100  770,000  900,000  Loss  
9  Week 3  4500  100  1,370,000  900,000  Profit  
10  Week 4  3000  200  940,000  900,000  Profit  
 
iii. State the format of data in cell B6.  
iv. Write down a formula that could be in cell D7 to calculate the income for 
week 1  
v. Describe how the formula D7 can be copied into the cells t8, D9  
vi. State the cells that are needed to create a line graph to show the income and 
expenses for week 1 and week 4.  
iv. Cell FT contains the function: = IF(D7>E7, Profit, Loss) and is copied into 
cells F8, F9 and F10. Write down the function that will be in cell F10.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 100 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 100 
 
QUESTION 32.  
Table 38 
Employee Age Service Salary Allowance Gross 
pay 
Taxable 
amount 
PAYE NSSF Net 
pay 
Nalwanga 54  120,000 70,000      
Kityo 34  135,000 85,000      
Abigaga 65  110,000 100,000      
Akello 35  150,000 130,000      
Lowery  60  200,000 70,000      
Bamoshena 57  98,000 15,000      
Omoding 49  78,000 10,000      
Nakimuli 29  140,000 80,000      
OKiru 27  95,000 65,000      
Olowo 63  130,000 20,000      
Namutebi 27  115,000 75,800      
a. enter the above data into your worksheet and answer the questions below 
b. Assuming each employee started working at the age of 23years, compute the 
years spent in service (to fill the service column)  
c. Taxable amount is computed after deducting NSSF and 13,300 (threshold) 
from the Gross Pay, PAYE is 30% of the Taxable amount; NSSF is 5% of the 
Gross pay. Compute the Gross pay, Taxable amount, PAYE, NSSF and Net 
pay.  
d. Insert the following records after Omoding and compute the relevant entries  
e. Delete the record for lowery from the worksheet  
 
QUESTION 33.  
A company deals in 6 major stationery items namely; counter books,Note books, 
printing paper, clip file, box files and diaries. The table belowRepresents the 
opening stock (0), closing stock (C), Quantity sold (Q) selling Price (S) and value of 
sales (v) respectively where, Q = 0 - C and V = S x Q.  
Table 39  
 A  B  C  D  E  F  
1 Item  
Opening  
stock 
(0)  
Closing 
stock (C)  
Quantities 
sold (Q)  
Selling price 
(S)  
Value of 
sales (V)  
2  Note books  200  120   1500   3  Printing paper  400  160   8000   4  Clip files  170  80   200   5  Box files  100  0   2500   6  Diaries  95  30   1800   7 Counter books 600  150   5000   
     Total value 
of sales   

--- PAGE 101 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 101 
 
i. Create a spreadsheet of the above, starting with th e item title Cell  A3and 
save it as ―Stationery 1‖  
ii. Put the appropriate formula in cell D3 to compute the amount sold.  
iii. Copy to the, rest of the column.  
iv. Put the appropriate formula in cell F3 to compute V.  
v. Sum up column F to find the total value of sales.  
vi. Use the graph function to draw a bar graph of sales for the various 
Items.  
vii. Write your name and index number below the graph.  
viii. Save the graph as ―My graph‖  
 
QUESTION 34.  
Below is a table of staff in an association. In one of their documentation, they 
require that the following information be captured to come up with a graph.  
Table 40  
Reg. No  Name  Age  Address  Department  Basic Pay  NetPay 
UGA001 Namutebi 28  Lugala Housing  800,000   
UGA002 Kiwewesi 37 Kasanga Sales 900,000  
UGA003  Lule 44  Kawala Accounts V  600,000   
UGA004  Sematimba 51  Naru Computer  600,000   
UGA006 Kayiwa 55  Bwaise Sales  1,000,000  
UGA007  Kayanja 47 Lubaga Housing 5,000,000  
UGA008 Muwanguzi 48 Entebbe Computer 900,000  
UGA008 Mitala 54 Kalerwe Accounts 700,000  
You are required to:  
i. Enter the information above in a spreadsheet program. (5 marks)  
ii. Insert a title Staff association which is centered in merged cells above 
the table records. (2 marks)  
iii. Insert the record of Sematimba between Kayiwa and Kayanja. (1 mark)  
Age: 56; Department: sales; Address: Muyenga; Basic Pay: 500,000;  
Reg. No:UGAOO5 
iv. Include a header containing the current date and time. (2 marks)  
v. Include afooter containing your name and index number. (2marks)  
vi. Calculate the Net Pay if an allowance of 130,000 is deducted from the 
Basic Salary. (2marks)  

--- PAGE 102 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 102 
 
vii. Delete Sheet 2 and Sheet 3. (1 mark)  
viii. Create a pie - chart as a  separate sheet to represent the Net Pay of the 
various staff. (3marks) 
ix. Save the work on a diskette as ‗chogm‘ in a folder called CHOGM. (2 marks) 
 
QUESTION 35.  
The table below represents prices of commodities in various markets in aparticular 
town.  
Table 41 
 A  B  C  D  E  F  
1  COMMODITY MARKET  
1 
MARKET  
2 
MARKET  
3 
MARKET  
4  
2  Rice  1,000  1,100  1,950  1,100   
3  Sugar  1,700  1,650  1,710  1,800   4  
 Meat  2,500  2,20O  2,700  2,800   
5  Salt  400  450  500  410   
6  Oats  1,200  1,100  1,150  1,210   7        
i. Enter the data as it is in a spreadsheet program. Use formulas to 
calculate the average prices of each commodity and insert your 
answer in column F. Save your entries as ―market prices‖  
ii. The prices of all commodities in markets 1 and 3 have been levied a 
value added tax (VAT) of 17%. Use a formula to calculate the new 
prices after VAT and put them in columns H and I .label them ―market 
1 with VAT‖ and ―market 3 with VAT‖ respectively. Save changes.  
iii. Create a column graph representing the, prices of sugar in the given 
markets. Save it in the same spreadsheet.  
iv. Put your name as the header and the index number and date as the 
footer on all copies of your work.  
v. Print your work.  
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 103 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 103 
 
QUESTION 36  
1. ‗This information was extracted from Kyabateeta high school.  
Study it carefully to answer the questions that follow.  
Table 42  
ITEM COST  
PRICE(UGX) 
SCHOOL  
TAX 
PROFITS  
 
EXPENSES  
 
SELLING  
PRICE 
Sumbiz     7,000/=  
Meat pie      25,000/=  
Splash      60,000/  
Daso     35,0001=  
Pens      40,0001=  
Chapuz     16,000/=  
Cassava chips      12,000/=  
Boxers      15,500/=  
cakes      35,000/=  
 
Other information:  
Selling price = cost price + school tax + expenses + profits.  
Expenses are = 40% of the selling price  
Profits are 30% of the selling price  
School tax is 10% of the selling price  
Tasks:  
As someone who appreciates spread sheets principles and functions:  
i. Enter the above information in a spreadsheet application of your choice  
ii. save it as with your real name.  
Determine the amount of tax the school gets from the canteen, profits and 
expenses for each item.  
iii. Determine the average and total amount of tax the school collects from the 
canteen.  
iv. Change the name of the spread sheet 1 to canteen sales.  
v. Determine the cost price for all items.  
(At the beginning of next year the canteen operators have asked the school 
management that he is going to increase selling price by 20%. Insert a new column 
to work out the new prices for all canteen items next year.)  
vi. Format all figures with UGX currency symbol with one decimal place.  

--- PAGE 104 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 104 
 
vii. On a separate sheet, plot a line chart to represent the items, cost price, and 
selling price.  
viii. Apply a centered footer of your name and registration number in your work 
sheet.  
ix. Sort the list in descending order according to items.  
x. Change the orientation of the first row of the table to 4 5 degrees and change 
its color to blue  
xi. Copy and paste your work on sheet two, an rename it ‗canteen‘  
xii. Wrap your text in the selling price title cell.  
 
  

--- PAGE 105 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 105 
 
MICROSOFT OFFICE ACCESS 
 (DATA BASES). 
A database is a collection of arranged data in a way that allows access retrieval, 
and use of the data.  
A database is an organized collection of data. It is considered to be organized 
because the data is stored in categories that are accessible ma logical or practical 
manner. Data can be anything that has significance to the organization the system 
is serving.  
Examples of paper databases  
1. Television guides  
2. Dictionaries  
3. Receipt cards  
4. Telephone books  
5. Libraries  
6. Schools  
7. Business directories  
8. Electricity 
etc. 
Examples of Computerized data bases.  
1. Data base systems in banks  
2. Phone inquiry systems  
3. Organizations like water  
4. Fight information. 
Data base software or database management system ( DBMS) allows the user to 
create, access and manage a database. Most PC databases consist of a collection of 
tables organized in rows and columns.  
 
Common terms used in data base  
a. Files:  
A file is a large organized data structure that contains related data such as records. 
Files are used for storing programs  and data in secondary storage. This is 
extremely important since the main memory is volatile:  
 
b. A Record:  
Every entry of data is referred to as a record. A record is a group of related i tems 
that we can treat as a single group. A record is a row in a table that contains 
information about a given person, product, or event. (An individual entry in a table)  
 
c. A Field:  
A field is a column of similar information or group of vertically arra nged data that 
contains similar, information of the same data type. Or it can be a column in the 
table that contains specific piece of information within a record.  
 
d. Table structure:  
This refers to the number of fields, field name (s), field length and  data types in a 
database table.  
 

--- PAGE 106 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 106 
 
A field name is assigned to each field to identify the different fields.  
e. Field length.  
This is the maximum number of characters that can be stored for data in a 
particular field.  
The data type of a field specifies the type of data that the field can contain.  
f. Data Validation:  
This is the process of comparing the data entered with a set of predefined rules or 
values to check if data is acceptable.  
Examples of data types used in Data base:  
a. Text type: This contains letters, numbers or special characters.  
b. Numeric type: This contains numbers only.  
c. Currency type: This contains dollar, pound cents etc.  
d. Date and time type: This contains text of any kind or length. 
e. OLE object: object linking and embedding. It includes objects, graphics or other 
binary data.  
f. Lookup wizard: When the value that you need exists in another table  
or from a list of statistical values you use a lookup wizard to help you establish a 
link to the tab le or define the combo box that will display the list of values on a 
form or report other data type may include;  
g. Boolean type  
Examples of database soft wares include  
i. Micro soft access  
ii. Micro soft visual  
iii. Borland data base  
iv. Lotus approach  
v. Corel paradox.  
vi. Claris file marker pro among 
others.  
Examples of corporate based systems include:  
i. SQL  
ii. Sybase  
iii. Oracle  
iv. Informix  
v. Ingress  
vi. Progress  

--- PAGE 107 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 107 
 
 
RESOURCE QUESTIONS OF DATABASE. 
(MICROSOFT ACCESS). 
 
QUESTION 1. 
G4S is a security organization that owns runs a saving scheme for its members. You 
have been asked to use a use a database management syst em (DBMS) to help the 
scheme members maintain records of the association.  
Table 44. 
First 
Name 
Last 
Name 
Membership 
NO 
DOB Age Membership 
Fee (shs) 
Fully 
paid 
Kintu  Mark  4321  12/11/1990  200,000  Y 
Akullo Warren  5855  10/1/2015   50,000  N 
Akongo Joshua  514  08/08/2003  12,000  N 
Kifampa Bob  123  12/1/1999   10,000  N 
Kaleb  Peter  411  l0/03/2014  70,000  N 
Ondigo Sophie  868  12/12/2010  100,000  Y 
Wakiaga Precious  654  14/1/2013   140,000  Y 
Aketch Lucy  744  11/03/1992  60,0000  N 
 
(a) Create a database file called G4S that has the following fields of data for each 
member.  
(b) Assign an appropriate primary key and data types for your database  
(c) Use a form to enter the records in your database save your form as data  
(d) Use a query to compute  
i. Age of members of the association, save query as age  
ii. Create another query that would be used to display those whose first name 
starts with letter A and aged 18 and above name it Age  
iii. 18‖  
iv. For members born between 1990 and 2013, save it as born e) Generate a report 
for age query, save report as Age report  
f) Print your report  
 
 
 

--- PAGE 108 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 108 
 
 
QUESTION 2. 
The table below shows books in a library. 
BOKS IN THE LIBRARY 
Code 
number 
Title Name of 
Author 
Paper Back (P) or 
hard Back (H) 
Borrower 
Number 
Date Due 
back 
2043 The Great Gatsby F.Scott P 15234 01 June 08 
5284 Jane Austen -A 
life 
C.Tomalin H 11356 02 June08 
4033 Harry Porter and 
the Philosopher‘s 
Stone 
J.K.Rowling H 16582 26 May 08 
0549 Northern Lights P.Pullman P 12982 28 may 08 
 
BOWWOWERS 
Borrower Number Name Of 
Borrower 
Address of borrower Borrowers‟ Phone 
Number 
113 Tobias Anendra 658 Uhuru High way, 
P.o box 2809 
0772344567 
16582 Carlos Moyes 12, Avenue De Lupin, 
P.o box 65432 
0712417398 
 
Computers are now widely used in libraries. Using a database .management 
systems program: 
(a) Create a table of books and enter the data.     
(b) Create another table, of borrowers and enter the data.    
(c) Sort the records in part (a) in descending order of code numbers.    
(d) using fields: code number, title, name of author, paper back  or hard back, 
date due back, create a query showing borrowers number that is a above 12506 
using table in 2 (a). 
(e) Create a query, showing only books with hard back and the names of the 
author. The names of the authors should be in ascending order.    
(f) Create a relationship between the books‘ and borrowers‘ tables.   
(g) Put your name and index in the header and the current date and time in the  
footer of both tables.       
(h) Create a report using both tables and name the report as ―borrowers‖  
(i) Save the database as ―library database‖       
 
 

--- PAGE 109 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 109 
 
 
QUESTION 3. 
The Database Manager of Kakira Primary School provides you with the following 
details. Use it to carefully attempt the following instructions. 
 
FamilyName FirstName Sex Age Science SST English Maths 
Kamusiime Edwin M 17 50 77 47 88 
Moreri Nicholas M 17 63 56 13 56 
Mugerwa Ronald M 16 55 28 83 35 
Akena  Kennedy M 18 22 47 55 78 
Kakaire Musa M 14 36 75 68 98 
Ssentongo David M 18 99 96 91 65 
Babibye Lonah F 19 55 35 38 65 
Namulondo Mary F 16 66 84 61 67 
Kafuko Ivan M 15 47 82 53 35 
Kimgugwe Joseph M 13 12 82 24 81 
Namboso Hellen F 17 36 83 35 80 
Aketch Harriet F 16 88 96 56 50 
Naigamba Pauline F 18 71 72 77 60 
Opio  William M 16 29 56 88 75 
Akeko Judith F 15 26 46 68 37 
 
Required 
(i) You are required to design a suitable database to manage the above 
information, name the Database KAKIRA PS DATABASE.  
(ii) Create a table using Design View , and name it STUDENTS 
RESULTS. 
(iii) Create a form called Results Entry Form and enter the above 
records.  
(iv) Create a query displaying all the fields in the above table to filter out 
only pupils who are females. Save it as Females. Print the query and 
its output.   
(v) Create another query displaying all the fields of pupils with ages 15 
and above.  Name it Aged 15 Plus. Print the query and its output.   
(vi) Create a query displaying all the fields in the above table to filter out 
only pupils whose Math marks are between 35 and 81. Name it Marks 
between 35 and 81.          
(vii) Create a query to filter out the pupils who scored at least 70 marks in 
SST and English. Name it AT LEAST 70 MARKS IN SST AND 
ENGLISH.  Print the query and its output.       
(viii) Create a report showing FamilyName, FirstName, Sex and Age. Name 
it Simple Report. Print the report.    
  
 
    

--- PAGE 110 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 110 
 
 
QUESTION 4. 
 
Carefully study the information given below.  
 
 
 
 
Required 
a) Design a suitable database to manage the above information, name the 
Database BCM DATABASE.     
b) Create a table using Design View, and name it STUDENTS TABLE.   
c) Create a form called Students Entry Form and enter the above records.    
d) Create a query displayi ng all the fields in the above table to filter out only 
students who are females. Save it as Females. Print the query and its output.   
(a) Create another query displaying all the fields of students with donations  5000 
and above.  Name it 5000 Plus. Print the query and its output.     
(b) Create a query displaying all the fields in the above table to filter out only 
students whose donations are between 2200 and 9900. Name it Donations 
between 2200 and 9900.    
(c) Create a query to filter out the students who donated a t least 5000 in Interact 
and Writers clubs. Name it Interact and Writers.  Print the query and its output.   
(d) Create a report using Donations between 2200 and 9900 query. Name it 
Report Between. Print the report.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
StudentID Surname FirstName Sex Club Donation  
BCM652 Kamusiime Edwin M Interact  5000 
BCM441 Moreri Juliana F Debating  6300 
BCM102 Mugerwa Ronald M Writers 5500 
BCM333 Akena  Kennedy M Interact  2200 
BCM459 Kakaire Musa M Writers 3600 
BCM245 Ssentongo David M Debating 9900 
BCM134 Babibye Lonah F Writers 5500 
BCM101 Namulondo Mary F Interact 6600 
BCM376 Kafuko Ivan M Debating 4700 

--- PAGE 111 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 111 
 
 
QUESTION 5. 
 
 (a) Using any database software of your choice create this database for Kiti Primary 
School  
Save it as KITI database. (01 mark) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(b). Assign a primary Key to one of the most appropriate field.                                          
(c)  The student index number should increment by 001                                                      
(c). Assign appropriate data types                                                                                         
(d). use lookup wizard for Gender field                                                                                
(e). Create a form in a tabular form called Students and use it to populate your 
database. 
 (f). Create a query and calc ulate the total marks obtained by each student which is 
the sum ofall the four subjects.                                                                                                                          
(h). Create a query to display the following  
i. Pupils whose names have character ―gi‖. Save as ―gi‖ query.    
ii. Pupils who scored above 50 in moth, English and are males.   Save as 
―Scores‖  
iii. Sort the names in the table descending order      
(i). Generate a report to display the information queried in h (ii). Save your report as 
Scores final report.            
(j). Include logo for the report, header and footer your name and personal number 
respectively.                                                         
(k). Print out only your data base object ….. Report generated   in part (j) above  
 
QUESTION 6. 
 (a) Create a table using design view with the following fields:  NAME, DATE OF 
BIRTH, SEX, RELIGION and FEES BALANCE. Set the NAME field as the primary key 
and save the table as ―Candidates Table‖                          
(06marks) 
     (b) Creates a form to enter the records below and save the form as ― Candidates 
form‖ 
 
INDEX 
No 
NAME STREA
M 
GENDE
R 
MTC ENG SST SCI 
KITI/00
1 
Ouma Derick P7N M 43 56 90 15 
 Peter Biwott P7E F 52 65 77 61 
 Kirungi. Paul P7 N M 66 14 88 52 
 John Makokha P7E M 80 96 78 60 
 Kimani Joseph P7N F 89 63 43 25 
 Mpagi Nofhan P7E M 71 60 49 65 
 NakanwagiMilly P7N F 23 42 21 74 

--- PAGE 112 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 112 
 
NAME DATE OF BIRTH SE
X 
RELIGION FEES BALANCE FEES 
BALANCE 
Tina T Jan, 02, 90 F catholic 40, 000  
Golfer J. Feb, 20, 89 M Muslim 60, 000  
Bob Baller Mar, 13, 88 M Protestant 55, 000  
Alice Cricketer Apr, 04, 89 F Pentecostal 20, 000  
Sam Big Jun, 03, 90 M Catholic 25, 000  
Jenifer J Feb, 04, 87 F Adventist 90, 000  
Musa B Jul, 05,98 M Muslim 40, 000  
 
(c) Create a query displaying  all the students whose names begin with letters ‗B‘ 
and ‗T‘. Save it as ―BT” query.                
(d) Create another form in ―Design View‖ with all the available records in the given 
table and name it ―Design view form‖                                                                    
(e)  Use a query to calculate the fees balance of the students supposing the school 
fees payable is ‟90,000‟. Save the query as fees Balance.     
(f) Generate a report for the above table with FEES BALANCE in descending order. 
Use columnar lay out and Portrait as the form orientation. Name this report 
―Columnar report 1‖   
(g) Generate a query to filter out students who are NOT Protestants and Catholics          
 (h) Save your database as your name and index number.   
 
 
QUESTION 7. 
The table exhibited shows the records of hours worked in the month of June 2017 
by each employee in one of the wheat industry in Kampala.  
EmployeeNo Name Gender Date of 
Birth 
Hours 
worked 
Hourly 
Rate 
Total 
June  
Wedge 
1 Pius Mukasa M 2/12/1980 40 25000  
2 Rita Nanono F 14/04/1979 36 30000  
3 Susan  Akot F 30/5/1985 24 38000  
4 Margaret Nin  F 5/5/1978 30 26000  
5 Paul Toto M 7/6/1977 35 22000  
6 Peter  Zziwa M 6/1/1979 33 20000  
7 Lilian Achan F 4/6/1978 25 25000  
8 Joyce Mum F 25/3/1986 50 15000  
9 Tom  Wawa M 23/2/1984 46 22000  
10 James 
Semakula 
M 24/4/1981 45 24000  

--- PAGE 113 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 113 
 
a. Create database file name wheat using any available database management 
system application.        
b. Design a table called employee with all the appropriate fields and the 
primary key.   
c. Apply correct data types foe each field.      
d. Design a form for the Employee table and name it employee Form.  
e. Use the form to enter all the records in the employee‘s table to the database. 
f. Design queries that can: 
i. Automatically compute the total June‘s wedge per employee and save it 
Salary. 
ii. Filter Female employees that have worked for more than 40 hours and 
save it femal40.        
g. Generate a report of Female40 query and name it Female40 report.   
h. Save changes and print the report Female40.     
 
QUESTION 8. 
The table below shows departmental records of a certain secondary school.  
ITEM Table  
Table 43  
ItemNo ItemName Quantity Arrival Date Price Per Item Department Total  
Price 
I  PC  40  15/2/2015  Shs. 1,500,000  1CT   
2  Chair  100  10/1/2015 Shs. 100,000  Academic   
3  Microscope  05 5/1/2015 Shs. 2,000,000 Chemistry   
5  Bible  100 4/2/2015 Shs. 50,000 C.R.E  
4  Voltmeter  60  20/1/2015  Shs.80,000  Physics   
5  Bible  100  4/2/20 15  Shs.50,000  C.R.E   
6  Atlas  200  30/3/2015  Shs.50,000  Geography   
7  Rabbit  150  20/3/2015  Shs.26,000  Biology  
8  Pure 2  
Math book  
300  4/4/2015  Shs.75,000  Mathematics 
 
 
9  Printers  10  10/3/2012  Shs.1,500,000  ICT  
10  Smart Board  11  13/5/2012  Shs.10,000,000  Academic   
a) Create a database called details. 
b) Design a table with appropriate primary key, data types in design view called 
Items. 
c) Create a form called Item. Use the form created in (c) to enter the given 
records above.  
d) Compute the total Price of all item from the query and save it as price  
e) Create a query to display all details of items whose arrival date is not in the 
year 2015 save it as Not20l5. 
f) Create a query to display all details of items for either Mathematics or 
Biology departments. Save it as biomathematics  

--- PAGE 114 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 114 
 
g) Create a report to disp lay the information in biomathematics query showing 
all details and save as biomathematics  
h) Print the report called bio mathematics 
 
QUESTION 9  
Create a table with the information below and name it ―patient tab1e‖ (Use 
appropriate data type).  
Table 45 
Reg. no. First name Gender  
 
Age Ailment Prescription Review 
 
08/U/12201 Ham Male 20 Malaria Tablets 3days 
06/U/15421 Beth Male 50 Tb Injection 1week 
02/U/62452 Kit Female 35 Cancer Tablets 5days 
02/U/45781 Harry Male 42 Hypertension Tablets 2weeks 
08/U/14202 Alpha Male 36 Malaria Drip 3days 
07/U/34752 Chris Male 18 Headache Tablets 2days 
04/U/21123 Maggie Female 62 Cancer Tablets  Month 
08/U/17650 Morene Male 20 Headache Tablets 2days 
02/U/12431 Francesca Female 41. Malaria Drip 5days 
05/U/18214 Keith Male 36 Hypertension Tablets 2weeks 
03/U/1902 Alvin Male 42 TB Injection 30days 
06/U/14352 Grace Female 12 Malaria Tablets 3days 
 
i. Display the entire data in a form and call it “Patients‟ form”. 
ii. Create a query to reflect all male patients below 2 1 years of age with 
malaria ailment and name it ―Malaria patients‖.  
iii. iii Retrieve a report to reflect all patients with hypertension to bereviewed 
in 2 weeks. Name it “Hypertension”. 
iv. Create a query to reflect male patients bellow 21 years of age with 
malaria ailment and name it “malaria form” 
v. Create a report to view all records sorted with their first names and name 
it “all records”. 
vi. vi.. Create a report to view all male patients. Name it “males” 
vii. Create a report for patients on drip.name it “drip patients” 
viii. Save the work and make a printout.  
  

--- PAGE 115 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 115 
 
QUESTION 10.  
Recent survey showed the following data. Enter the information below into the table 
called ―survey‖  
Table 46. 
Reg no. Surname Firstname Sex Age District 
0006 OKello Rose  Female  15 Tororo 
0010 Opio John  Male  62 Tororo 
0007 Masaba Patrick  Male  40 Mbale  
0127 Mukasa Alex  Male  20 Masaka 
0053 Lwanga Lydia  Female  34 Masaka 
0008 Abaho Kate  Female  52 Female  
0021 Mugisha Joseph  Male  5 Kabala  
0458 Akot Aisha  Female  22 Lira  
0500 Namubiru Grace  Female  45 Kisoro 
0080 Birungi Sarah  Female  31 Masaka 
i. You are required to design a. suitable database to manage the above 
information, name the database ―workers‘ database‖  
ii. Create a table using design view, name it ―worker table‖  
iii. Create a form called workers‘ entry form and enter the above records.  
iv. Create a query to show workers from Masaka.  
v. Create a query to show all females above 25 years  
vi. Create a report for all the names and districts.  
vii. Save your work in your folder and make a printout.  
 
QUESTION 11.  
Create a table with the information below and name it ―customer table‖. ( Use 
appropriate data type)  
Table 47 
Id No. Name  
 
Gender Title Sales 
revenue 
Cost of goods sold 
U12201 Ham Male  W.seller 12,000 9,500 
U15421  Beth  Male  Retailer  8,500  6,100  
U62452  Kit  Female  W.seller 10,200  8,200  
U45781 Harry  Male  Retailer   6,000 4,200  
U14202  Alpha  Male  Agent  15,000  7,200  
U34752  Chris  Male  W.seller 62,000  400,000  
U21123  Maggie  Female  W.seller 74,000  51,000  
U17650  Morene Male  Retailer  5,600  2900  
U12431  Francesca  Female  Retailer  8,300  1500  
U18214 Keith  Male Agent 20,300 10,000 
U19402  Alvin  Male w.seller 16,000  12,100  
U 14352  Grace  Female  Agent  4,500  1,300  

--- PAGE 116 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 116 
 
i. Calculate the gross margin for the sales in a form.  
ii. Display the entire data in a form and call it “Patients‟ form” 
iii. Create a query to retrieve all w. sellers and name it “W.seller” 
iv. Create a report to retrieve all male customers Name it “Males” 
v. Create a query to show male agents. Name it “Male agents” 
vi. Sort the names of the customers in alphabetical order.  
vii. Create a report to show all the records.name it “ALL records” 
viii. Make a print out of your work.  
 
QUESTION 12.  
Create a table with the information below and name it ―workers‘ table‖. (Use 
appropriate data type)  
ID.NO SUR  
NAME 
SEX TITLE DEPARTMENT SALARY D.O B 
ZL001 JESSICA F CHIEF 
WORKER 
MANAGEMENT  
 
730,000 18/06/37 
ZL040 JULIANA F WORKER KITCHEN 630,000 05/08/78 
ZL071 ZAK M WORKER KITCHEN 700,000 05/06/72 
ZL160 ANN F SECRETARY RESEARCH 385,000 19/06/37 
ZL178 JAMES M WORKER KITCHEN 600,000 14/05/64 
ZL180 JONAH M DIRECTOR MANAGEMENT 120,000 18/08/67 
ZL185 EMILY F CASHIER MANAGEMENT 700,000 14/05/69 
ZL220 JACOB M DRIVER MANAGEMENT 375,000 17/06/64 
ZL230  JULIET F SECRETARY ICT 385,000 19/08/71 
ZL340 AMIN M LIBRARIAN RESEARCH 420,000 08/12/75 
 
The table above gives information on some workers of an events  Management 
Company called: ―AMIGO CHEFS CATERING SERVICES” 
i. You are required to design a suitable database to manage the above 
information, name the database “workers‟ database” 
ii. Create a table using design view, name it workers‘ table  
iii. Create a form called chefs‘ entry form and enter the above records.  
iv. Create a query displaying all the fields in the above table to filter out only 
workers from the department of research. Save it as research department  
v. Create another query displaying all  the fields of workers with salary less 
than 320,000.name it less than 320,000.  
vi. The am igo chefs‘ catering services promotions age is 52jears. Create a 
query filtering out the employees whose ages are above 52.name 
itpromotional age.  
vii. Save your work and make a print out.  

--- PAGE 117 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 117 
 
QUESTION 13.  
The table below shows books in the library.  
Data base of books in the library.  
Table 49  
Id.  
Number 
Title Name of  
author 
Cover Borrower‟s  
number 
Date due 
back. 
5032  The great Gatsby  F. Scott  P 1625  02/05/08  
4215  Jane Austen – a life  C. T omalin H 4212  04/06/08  
3042  
 
Harry potter and the  
philosopher‘s stone  
J. K Rowling P 3215  
 
08/07/08  
 
5632  Northern lights  P. Pullman  h 4215  09/06/08  
 
Database of borrowers:  
Table 50 
NUMBER  NAME  ADDRES  PHONE NUMBER  
1524  Tobias Kalema P.OBOX 123 0752621342  
2635   Carlos Morene  P.O B0X321  0702853215  
Computers are now widely used in libraries. Using a database management 
systems program.  
a) Create a table of books and enter the data.  
b) Create another table of borrowers and enter the data.  
c) Sort the records in part (a) in descending order of id number.  
d) Using fields: id number, title, name of author, cover, date due back, create a 
query showing borrowers number that is above 2053 using table 2 (a).  
e) Create a query, showing only books with cover and names of the author. The 
names of the authors should be in ascending order.  
f) Create a relationship between the books and borrowers‘ tables.  
g) Put your name in the header and put the current date and time in the footer 
of the report.  
h) Create a report using both tables, put your name in the header and put the 
current date and time in the footer of the report.name the report as 
―borrowers‖  
i) Save the database as ―library database‖  
j) Make a print out of your work.  
 
 
 

--- PAGE 118 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 118 
 
QUESTION 14.  
The database manager of Kakira primary school provides you with the following 
details. Use it carefully attempt the following instructions.  
Table 51  
FAMILY  
NAME  
FIRST  
NAME  
SEX  AGE  SCIENCE  SST  ENGLISH  MATHS  
Kamusiime Edwin  M  17  50  77  47  88  
Moren Nicholas  M  17  63  56  13  56  
Mugerwa Ronald  M  16  55  28  83  35  
Akena Kennedy  M  18  22  47  55  78  
Kakair Musa  M  14  36  75  68  98  
Ssentongo David  M  18  99  96  91  65  
Babirye Lonah F  19  55  35  38  65  
Narnulondo Mary  F  16  66  84  61  67  
Kafuko Ivan  M  15  47  82  53  35  
Kingugwe Joseph  M  13  12  82  24  81  
Namboso Helen  F  17  36  83  35  80  
Aketch Harriet  F  16  88  96  56  50  
Naigamba Pauline  F  18  71  72  77  60  
Opio William  M  16‘  29  56  88  75  
Required:  
i. You are required to design a suitable database to manage the above 
information, name the database ―KAKIRA PS DATABASE.‖  
ii. Create a table using design view, and name it ―STUDENTS RESULTS‖  
iii. Create a form called results entry form and enter the above records.  
iv. Create a query displaying all the fields in the above table to filter out only 
pupils who are females.  
v. Save it as ―females‖ Print the query.  
vi. Create another query displaying all the fields of pupils with age 15 and 
above.  
vii. Name it above 15. Print the query and its output.  
viii. Create a query displaying all the fields in the above table to filter out only 
pupils whose math marks are between 35 and 81. Name it math marks 
between 35 and 81.  

--- PAGE 119 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 119 
 
ix. Create a query to filter out the pupils who scored at least 70 marks in SST 
and English. Name it ATLEAST 70 MARKS IN SST AND ENGLISH. Print the 
query and its output.  
x. Create a report showing family Name, First Name, Sex, and Age. Name it 
―SIMPLE REPORT‖  
xi. Print the report.  
 
QUESTION 15.  
The table below is a record of employees in a school canteen.  
SIRNAME FIRST  
NAME 
SEX DATE OF  
BIRTH 
TELEPHONE  
NUMBERS 
BOX  
NUMBERS 
Mandela  Margaret  F  02/16/1967  079-488-888  P.OBOX267 K‘LA  
OKello Joel  M  12/17/1970  090-500-555  P.O BOX433 M‘KA  
Nyaika Ronnie  M 07/28/1980 040-400-767 P.O BOX444 K‘LA 
Waibale Anthony  M  10/03/1979  090-333-212  P.O BOXJJA  
Jamila  Liza  F  02/25/1985  099-233-345  P.OBOX 453 K‘LA  
Saidi Juma M 11/12/1977 011-333-466 P.O BOX123 K‘LA 
Zaweede Zubeda F  14/12/1977  088-444-666  P.O BOX990 ARUA  
a) Create a database named as “Canteen” 
b) Create a table of the data above and save it as “Staff record” 
c) Choose an appropriate field and make it the primary key  
d) Design a form using the database table, and name it “Entry data form” use it 
to populate the table. The form should display. 
i. All field options as they appear in the table except the sex field which 
should be a combo box to display‖ sex‖.  
ii. Fill the form background with a yellow color 
e) Sort the records in the table in descending order of the surnames.  
vi. Filter only female staff employees and produce a report.  
f) Print the report in ascending of surnames.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 120 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 120 
 
 
QUESTION 16.  
Birigwajo establishments Uganda limited has contracted you as their senior 
database manager.  
a. Using a suitable database software program create a database name it your 
name and index number.  
Table 53  
EMP NO NAME SEX DEPARTMENT D.O.B SALARY 
P00l  MUSUBIKAE F HUMANRESOURCE 2/23/1975 800,000/= 
P002 BAALIM M ACCOUNTS 3/17/1979 600,000/= 
P003 MULUMBAR M COMPUTER 12/30/1987 550,000/= 
P004 KAFEEROJ M ACCOUNTS 5/18/1973 450,000/= 
P005 MUKEERA S F COMPUTER 11/24/1995 650,000/= 
P006 NALUBWAMA A F HUMANRESOURCE 8/17/1990 650,000/= 
P007 NAMUWONA S F COMPUTER  3/22/1989 700,000/= 
b. Design a table named Employee table with appropriatedata types in design 
view.  
c. Enter the given data in the table.  
d. Create a query with all fields to filter female employees in the computer 
department and save it as ―computer‖  
e. Create a query with all fields to filter female employees who are, twenty years 
and above use  
QUESTION 17.  
Use the information in the table be low to design a database. Name the table as 
tblEmp and store the database file as company.  
Table 54 
NAME DATE OF  
BIRTH 
SEX ID-NO DEPT SALARY-PAID  
(USH.) 
Akram 20-07-71  Male  1377841  Accounts  30OO0O  
Bikala 30-05-78  Male  1235542  Sales  400,000  
Njalira 30-06-79  Male  1244745  Accounts  560,000  
Sentuya 14-04-77  Male  2213540  Marketing  450,000  
Kebirungi 14-04-77  Female  1124681  Sales  300,000  
Katende 12-06-47  Male  1455367  Accounts  350,000  
Muswabur 25-04-80  Male  0147535  Sales  700,000  
Halima  01-01-79  Female  5664124  Sales  350,000  
a) Create a form and add more records using the form.  

--- PAGE 121 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 121 
 
b) Create three reports to print the information below:  
 Employees listed by department type.  
 Alphabetical listing of all employees.  
 All employees in the sales department get a 2% commission on sales.  
c) Create a report to show the commission paid to all the sales people, if the basic 
salary for sales people is 300,000.  
d) Create a query to show who will be retiring at the end of the year, if the 
retirement age is 55.  
 
QUESTION 18.  
Tertiary institutions loan board is  a government  body created to give loans and 
bursaries to needy students at the public universities. It is required that the 
information of the students is stored in a database for future repayment of the 
loans. The following data is stored.  
 Name  
 Students‘ registration number  
 Sex  
 Date of entry to the university  
 Loan given  
 Interest charged  
 Repayment period  
i. Create a table to store the above data.  
ii. Create a form to enter data.  
Enter 10 sample records. The form should have validation routines to ensure that 
the amount borrowed does not exceed Ush.420, 000 and the minimum age of the 
student is not below 16.  
iii. Create query called ―loan over 200k‖ that will filter the students who have 
been given a loan of more than Ush.200, 000.  
iv. Create a report called repayment to sho w Name, loan amount, interest 
charged, repayment amount and monthly installment.  
v. Create a report that shows a history of loan given out over a period of 10 
years. Include a summary showing the total, minimum, maximum and 
average loan amount for that period.  
 
 

--- PAGE 122 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 122 
 
QUESTION 19.  
A school in Kiboko County, Mbemba district has a population of 500 students and 
various subject Departrnent  some twenty stud ents, 12 of th e girls  live in Mbogo 
and Kyadondo houses. The other 8 are boys who live in Kakungulu and Mivule  
houses.  
Required:  
i. Create a database a database file with the fields:  
ii. Surname, last Name, Age, sex, Registration Number, Address, Class and 
Houses for the 20 students.  
iii. Sort the data in (i) above using, surname as the key field. Save yourdatabase 
file in a folder under your names on desktop.  
iv. Design a table using the data in (i) above in datasheet view.  
v. Create a query for house members of Mbogo and Mivule houses.  
vi. Create a report showing the fields: surname, class, and house.  
vii. Save your table in your folder as D table.  
 
QUESTION 20. 
The following are the members who reside in the UK.  
MEMID  NAME  STREET  CITY  POSTCODE  BALANCE  CRED- LIM  
L00l  Muhumuza FaxStreet  London  Wi  10,000  20,000  
L002  Kasaawa CaxStreet  Bristol  Bs8 9ee  20,000  15,000  
L003  Ssemakula MarxStreet  Lee  Ls3 Ijj 15,000  32,000  
.  
L004  Luyima Ex DeWax  Liverpool  Md6 Ym 20,000  24,000  
L005  Cissy  FetxWest  Birmingham  Tr&7  30,000  28,000  
L006  Ahumuza MithsDeNt London  Yt&6  60,000  76,000  
L007  Tendo Bax RxWax  Liverpool  R1 67,000  79,000  
L008  Mbatudde Mard DeSt  Lee  Mwx7  
 20,000  50,000  
L009  Nampeera CaxTh Wilshire  Mmr 67,000  79,000  
L010 Rayaa‘n  Man Tx Manchester  Dd& R  20,000  50,000  
Required:  
i. Create a table and enter the information as shown above.  
ii. Name your table as members of UK.  
iii. Create a form that can be used to enter data from above table.  
iv. Create a query to display all records that end with ST from the street 
field and call it “ST street” 

--- PAGE 123 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 123 
 
v. Create a query that will display all records that begin with M from the 
street and call it “Ms tree” 
vi. Create a query that will display all records that are having the word de 
anywhere in the field from the street and call it destreet. 
vii. Create a query that will display all customers with the balance between  
viii. 25,000 - 50,000.  
ix. Save your work in the folder created on desktop as membership UK  
 
QUESTION 21.  
Create a new database and save it as workshop register.  
i. Create a new table for the following  fields: Reg No, Names, Se x, Date of 
birth, Status, Address.  
ii. Set RegNo as the primary key.  
iii. Save the table as ―attendance registry‖ and close it.  
iv. Modify the table design for the following field properties.  
 Reg-no text (size 12)  
 Name Text (size 20)  
 Date text (format long-date)  
v. Create a form and save it as ―data entry form‖ and use the form to enter the 
records here below in the table.  
Table 56  
REG-No NAMES SEX DOB STATUS ADDRESS 
Comp/99/045  KatendeMusa  M  12/08/1960  Resident  Mbarara 
Comp/99/046  Kebirungi Lailah  F  12/07/1960  Non-resident  Lira  
Comp/99/047  Kaliisa Hassan  M  14/11/1965  Resident  Soroti 
Comp/99/048 SeguyaAbubaker M 12/12/1967 Resident Mbale  
Comp/99/049  MatovuUmar  M  17/11/1965  Resident  Iganga  
Comp/99/050  WatsembaIsha F  18/01/1972  Non-resident  Kampala  
Comp/99/051 NaggayiShamilah F 19/11/1960 Non-resident Masaka 
Comp/99/052  Higenyi Ismail  M  20/03/1960 Non-resident  Bushenyi 
Comp/99/053  Njalira Moses  M  21/04/1960  Resident  Kampala  
Comp/99/054  NaluzzeSharifa F  22/04/1969  Resident  Kampala  
Comp/99/055  BikalaHashim M  23/11/1970  Non-resident  Mbarara 
Comp/99/056  SentuyaFaisal  M  24/02/1960  Resident.  Masaka 
Comp/99/057  KasoziSadiq M  25/05/1955  Non-resident  Soroti 

--- PAGE 124 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 124 
 
Comp/99/058  NamenyaNulu F  26/08/1974 Resident  Bushenyi 
Comp/99/059  Kimuli Hood  M  26/08/1974  Resident  Entebbe  
Comp/99/060  KaweesaHussein  M  27/09/1957  Resident  Kampala  
vi. Create a form and save it as data entry form and use the form to enter the 
records here below in the table.  
vii. Create query displaying only Reg -no, name and sex to filter female 
attendants. Save it as female attendants.  
viii. Create a query displaying on Reg -no, name and status to filter out resident 
attendants. Save it as residents.  
ix. Create a query displaying attendants whose dates of birth are between 
01/01/ 1965 and 01/01/1970.  
x. Create a report out of the above data (ix).name it attendants born between 
1965 and 1970.  
xi. Create a report grouping the records by status using the registry table. Give 
it a title “COMP99 WORKSHOP REGISTRY” 
xii. Save the report as registry list by sex.  
 
QUESTION 22.  
Create a new table using the corresponding raw data below  
OLD STUDENTS ASSOCIATION MEMBERSHIP  
Table 57  
Membership First 
name 
Last 
name 
Se
x 
Reg. date Status Home 
town 
Member
ship 
Shs 
2002/001  
Nancy  okumu F  30/9/2002 ORDINARY Tororo 50000  
Shs 
2002/002  
Maggie  Kigozi F  01/01/2003  ORDINARY  Sembabule 10000 
.  
Shs 
2002/003  
Betty  Nassuna F  02/09/199  EXECUTIVE  Najja 80000  
Shs 
2002/004  
Godfrey  Kato  M  04/08/2000  SENIOR  Shinyanga 20000  
Shs 
2002/005  
Mukhata Wafula M  09/07/1999  SENIOR  Busia 150000  
Shs 
2004/006  
Diaz  Ogutu M  28/02/1996  ORDINARY  Nimule 120000  
Shs 
2004/007  
Dianna  Zawadi F  26/02/1986  EXECUTIVE Dar  100000  
.  
Shs 
2004/008  
Yoweri Kaguta M  25/2/2000 EXECUTIVE  Rwakitura 150000  
Shs 
2004/009  
Moser  Helmont M 20/01/2000 EXECUTIVE  Vienna  250000  

--- PAGE 125 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 125 
 
 
i. Set membership ID as primary key.  
ii. Create a form based on all the fields in the table, name it membership entry 
form.  
iii. Create a form based on all the fields in the table, name it membership entry 
form.  
iv. Create a query to display only membership ID, first n ame. Last name and  
status. Those with executive members  
v. Create another query displaying all fields to dis play members with 
membership fee between 20000 and 80000 call it ―paid up members.‖ 
vi. Create another report using the query by home town grouping all records by 
town; name the report as members by Hometown.  
vii. Create another report using the query members by home town grouping all 
the records by town; name the report as members by home town.  
 
QUESTION 23.  
The table below gives information on some students  in a certain secondary school 
about the registration numbers, names, classes, age and names of house where 
they reside.  
REG. NO  NAME  CLASS  AGE  HOUSE  
001  Lule S  S.2 15  Muteesa 
002  Kizza V  S.2 14  Muteesa 
003  Omeda A  S.4 16  Samba  
004  Semebwa S  S.3 16  Bikanga 
005  KibuukaD  S.2 13  Simba 
006  AmitJ  S.1 12  Lumumba  
007  Onen L  S.3 17  Lumumba  
008  Semuli M  5.5 17  Simba 
009  Sendi J  S.1 11  Muteesa 
010  Kasanya D  S.4 15  Bikangaga 
 
i. Create a table and name it personal details with fields.  
ii. Enter the data above in the data table created using data types.  
iii. Create a query for Muteesa and Samba house member  
iv. Create query for students whose age ranges from 12 to 16.  
v. Create a report that shows the following fields, Class, Names and house.  
vi. Save your data base file as report. JlI 
 

--- PAGE 126 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 126 
 
QUESTION 24.  
The heights and weights of players in a football team were taken and their 
respective measurements were as follows.  
SHAN  177,63 75.2 
ABDUL 164,59 56.1 
NALIANYA 1 183,84 85 
OLOO 168,90 85 
SUZUKI 158,82 72 
CHEGE 168,80 78 
LETOIYA 168,70 56.3 
MUTUA 172,75 69.9 
MWANGI 174,65 71 
ROTICH 181,68 68 
KIMATHI 173,95 56 
 
The heights are centimeters while the weights are in kilograms.  
a) create a database file team that can be used to store the above data  
b) Enter the above records in the database you have created  
c) It is required that the total number of goals scored by each player in the 
previous matches be included in the database file.  
d) The first two players have two goals each, mutual and letoiya have scored 
three goals each, Suzuki and Kimatha have not scored any goal, while the 
rest have scored 1 goal each. Include these details in the database file and 
save as “TEAM 1” 
e) Make the field containing names to be primary key.  
i. Sort the database record in descending order of players goals scored and 
save the data base as ―Team ―  
ii. Create a report that displays the names, heights and goals scored for players 
whose weight are below 75 kg. 
iii. Make a print out. 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 127 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 127 
 
QUESTION 25.  
A school in Kiboga County, Mubende district has a population of 500 students  and 
various subject departments. Some twenty students, 12 of the girls live in  Maria 
and Theresa houses. The other 8 are boys who live in Muteesa and  Kabalega 
houses.  
Required to:  
a. Create a database file with fields.  
b. Surname, Last Name, Age, Sex, Registration Number, Address, Class and 
House for 20 students.  
c. Sort the data in (b) above using, Surname as the key field.  
d. Save your data base file on the Desktop as ―D file.‖  
e. Design a table in (b) above in a datasheet view  
f. Create a query for house members of Maria and Kabalega house.  
g. Create a report showing the fields: Surname, Class, and House.  
h. Save your table on the ―Desktop‖  
i. Using any available database software, create a database call it Old Students 
Association.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 128 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 128 
 
RESOURCE QUESTIONS FOR Ms PUBLISER. 
(ELECTRONIC PUBLICATION) 
QUESTION 1  
Using Microsoft office Publisher, design the business card of an individual working 
in any Institution of your choice. Include:  
a. Logo of the institution.  
b. Name of the institution.  
c. Name of the person.  
d. Job description of the person.  
e. The address.  
f. Office and Mobile telephone contacts.  
g. Email address.  
NOTE: Your cards should be attractive and rich in graphics.  
h. Save your file as business and the print preview of 6 cards per A4 paper.  
 
QUESTION 2.  
Using a Desktop Publishing Program of your choice, design the following cash 
Receipt and make four Copies on your publication page. Set the guides to the 
following pos itions: 2cm, 10.7cm, 11cm and 19.7cm (all vertical) and 1.5cm, 
11.5cm, 12cm, and 22cm horizontal.  
QUESTION 3.  
Using Microsoft publisher, design the business card of an individual working in an 
institution of your choice. Include;  
a) Name of the institution  
b) Log of the institution  
c) Name of the bearer of the business card  
d) Job description of the person  
e) Physical address, including e-mail  
f) Office and mobile telephone contacts  
Note:  
i. Your cards should be attractive and rich in graphics  
ii. Adjust the paper size using the following dimensions to a width of 8.4 inches 
and height 11.8 inches  

--- PAGE 129 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 129 
 
iii. Adjust the top and bottom margins to 0.4 inches.  
iv. Adjust the left and right margins to 0.3 inches  
v. Save your files as business card and then print preview of six cards per A4 
paper.  
QUESTION 4  
Using any desktop publishing software to design a certificate of excellence for 
KIRYAMENVU SENIOR SECONDARY senior six (S.6) candidates who have excelled 
in the following application packages: ms excel, ms power point, ms access and ms 
publisher. Provide space for the signatures of the head teacher and the head of ICT 
department.  
a) Adjust the paper size to a width of 11 inches and a height of 8.5 inches.  
b) Insert a clip art to represent the owner‘s photograph.  
c) Use your name as the owner of the certificate,  
d) Insert your name and personal number in the footer.  
e) Save and print your publication.  
QUESTION 5.  
Using suitable publishing software, design eight identical business cards titled on 
A4 page size, 3.5‖ width and 2‘ height.  
a) The cards‘ layout and spacing is as follows;  
i. Left and right margin should be 0.5‘  
ii. Top and bottom margins 0.7‘  
iii. The vertical and horizontal gap between cards 0.6‘  
b) The details of the card are:  
i. A logo of the company at the left hand side of the card. Provide the logo  
ii. A company name of your choice.  
iii. Job title e.g. managing director.  
iv. Your name e.g. Aisha Kainembabazi.  
v. Contact address, phone and e-mail.  
c) Include crop marks around each card.  
d) Save the publication as ―my business card‖  
e) Print your work.  
 

--- PAGE 130 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 130 
 
QUESTION 6  
Use suitable desktop publishing software; design a certificate to be awarded to 
students who have worked tirelessly for patriotism club in your school.  
a. Apply a suitable boarder to the certificate and a nice looking background.  
b. Use appropriate signatories to your certificate i.e. head master, patron and 
club president.  
c. Use suitable fonts i.e. type, size and colors for the text you have inserted.  
d. Design logo for your certificate  
e. Save the certificate as “Patriotism club — your names”  
f. Copy the saved file in your folder. Produce the print out.  
QUESTION 7  
You are required to Prepare the Cash receipt as it appears below.  
Table 59 
KKTRANSPORTERS LIMITED  
P.O.BOX 7000  
KAMPALA.  
Dealers in electronics and electricity equipment 
Item Quantity Unit Price(Shs) Amount (shs)  
 
    
    
    
    
    
 
Figure 15  
a) Font size should be 12 for the three line heading and the rest of the work in 
font size 10.  
b) Font color is black.  
c) Font face (style) is Anal Narrow.  
d) Insert header your name and footer your index number.  

--- PAGE 131 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 131 
 
QUESTION 8  
Using a suitable publishing software, design eight identical business cards titled on 
A4 page size ―width and 2‖height  
a) The cads‘ layout and spacing is as follows:  
i. Left and right margin should be 0.5  
ii. Top and bottom margins 0.7‖  
iii. The vertical and horizontal gap between cards 0.6‖  
b) The details of the card are:  
i. A logo of the company at the left hand side of the card. Provide the logo  
ii. Company name of your choice  
iii. Job title e.g. Managing Director  
iv. Contact address, phone and e-mail  
c) Include crop marks around each card  
d) Save the publications as ―my business card‖  
e) Print your work.  
QUESTION 9  
Design a certificate for any club of your choice in your school.  
i. Apply a border to detach your certificate and an appropriate background.  
ii. Use appropriate fonts.  
iii. Give two Signatories to your certificate.  
iv. Apply good graphics and graphical colors to your certificate.  
v. Save it in the name of your club.  
vi. Print your work.  
 
QUESTION 10 
Design a letterhead for your company which should among othe rs have a logo, 
address, date, well designed in appropriate fonts.  
a) In the normal view, list down the products offered by your company.  
b) Indent your work ―0.5‖ to the left and ―0.5‖ to the right and apply 1.5 line 
spacing.  
c) Apply a page borders on your document  
d) Save your work with your name as a file name 

--- PAGE 132 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 132 
 
e) Print a copy of your work.  
QUESTION 11  
You have been chosen a graphics designer of your school. Your responsibility i to 
develop a logo for the Writers‘ club in your school.  
a) Using only “three” - “four” letters to abbreviate the club name, Create a 
logo to be used by the writers‘ club of your school.  
b) Apply good graphics and graphical colors for the club to your logo.  
c) Use appropriate fonts.  
d) Use color patterns in any two of the letters.  
e) Save your work in your names and index number.  
f) Make a hard copy out of your work.  
QUESTION 12  
a) Using suitable Desktop publishing software, design four identical greeting 
cards to your friends for the Christmas festive season.  
b) Apply good minimal graphics and graphical colors to your greeting card.  
c) Make sure your card carries a season message and if so enticing to the 
target group.  
d) Group these four identical greeting cards and paste them to the next page to 
make eight cards on two pages.  
e) Save your work in your names  
QUESTION 13  
a. You are required to design the logo below as it appears.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
b. Using suitable desktop publishing tools,  
i. Rotate the logo to a 900 angle.  
ii. Group the letters in the logo  
 

--- PAGE 133 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 133 
 
c. Make six identical logos form the same logo.  
d. Save your work.  
e. Make a print out.  
QUESTION 14  
a) As graphics designer of your school, design a flyer for your favorite elections 
candidate on the post of Headboyship of your school.  
b) Your flyer should include.  
i. The Candidates‘ Names  
ii. Post and Class.  
iii. The school motto.  
c) It should among others include the best and appropriate fonts and colors.  
d) Save your work.  
e) Make two hard copies out of your work.  
 
QUESTION 15  
a) Using Microsoft Office Publisher, develop a simple webpage of your school. The 
page should among others have all features of a good webpage.  
b) Include the following on your page;  
Any introductory information about your school; Amon g the introductory  
information include;  
i. The School Mot  
ii. Subjects offered.  
c) A link for each of the departments in your school. (Physics MathDepartment, 
Languages Department, Chemistry Biology Department, theHistory, CRE, 
Geography, the Commerce, Entrepreneurship and Economics Department. . 
d) Include appropriate images on your home page.  
e) Table showing the classes the school has an enrolment for each class.  
e) Appropriate graphics and colors.  
f) Save your work as a webpage.  
g) Import it to the available browser offline.  
h) Print out the page.  
 
 
 

--- PAGE 134 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 134 
 
QUESTION 16  
Using any publication software design a certificate that should be awarded to 
senior six candidates of your school who have excelled in the followingcomputer 
applications.  
1. Ms Word.  
2. Ms Excel.  
3. Ms Access.  
4. Ms Power point.  
5. Ms Publisher.  
Additional information  
 Heading should be the name of your school.  
 Your name as the owner of the Certificate.  
 Insert signatories for the head teacher and HOD ICT  
 Use appropriate font colors designs and styles.  
 Insert a textural background of your choice.  
 Insert a logo of your choice.  
 Save your work as applications your name e.g. Application John. Print your 
work. 
 
QUESTION 17  
Titus is the new Marketing Manager of a company called ―inspirational Aspirations 
Ltd‖. The c ompany is located at Block 110, 7th street of industrial area. The 
contact address is P.0 . Box 130, Nakasero. His email Aspiration.com and 
+256414285193 respectively.  
Using a desktop publishing application of your choice, help Titus to come out with 
a designer ―business card‖ through the following activities.  
a) Use an appropriate page design to make eight identical cards per page.  
b) Save your publication as ―your name‖.  
c) Using a ruler guide measure take the following card dimensions-width 3.5 inches 
and height 2 inches.  
d) Design one card with the following details: Company logo of your choice; 
Company name; Name of employee; designation; Location; Contact address; Email 
and Telephone contacts.  
e) Select all the contents on the card and group them into one object.  
f; Apply an appropriate background color to your card.  
g) Insert your name and personal number as a footer.  
h) Save and print out a copy of your work.  

--- PAGE 135 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 135 
 
QUESTION 18  
Kawomera Restaurant LTD has embarked on re -designing their Menu card offered 
to customers.  
As a Desktop Publisher expert, you have been appointed to assist the marketing 
team in re-designing a menu card for the restaurant as a marketing and persuasive 
tool. The fonts, borders and graphics used  should be relevant to the publication as 
may be available in your software.  
a) Prepare a publication with the following paper specifications 
 Paper size set to A4, Portrait  
 Set margins to 10mm (0.4‖) all round  
b) Include the following on your menu  
 Name and address of the Restaurant  
 Available food stuffs and drinks served at the restaurant in threephases - 
Breakfast, Lunch and Supper.  
 A log at the Top Right.  
 Necessary C1T arts.  
c) Format your page as follows  
 Simple background color.  
 Bolden and centre the address.  
 Set the transparency of the fill color to 25% for all the clips arts in themenu.  
d) Include a logo at the top left of your menu.  
e) Include a Header ―your name‖ and a footer your ―Index Number‖.  
f) Save your work as Menu and Print a copy.  
 
QUESTION 19  
Using any available publishing software, design an invitation wedding cardwith the 
following:  
a) Names of the couple to be married and respective parents.  
b) Picture of the couple.  
c) Mobile phone numbers of organizers.  
d) Date and location/church for the weeding of these couple.  
e) The invitation message.  
f) Venue of, church, reception and after party.  

--- PAGE 136 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 136 
 
g) Attractive background and font text colors.  
h) Save the file as weeding.  
i) Print the work on a page of paper.  
 
QUESTION 20  
Eastern pride high school would like to have a calendar designed for it,  
a) Use any publishing software; design a calendar  for the school to includethe 
following information:  
i. Name of the school, location and contact information.  
ii. Badge of the school (either an object drawn or as clip art).  
iii. An image of clip art to represent the school,  
iv. School motto.  
b) The calendar area should be of font monotype corsiva size 36, colour dark blue.  
c) Pill the table part with an orange color. Set the color to 56% transparency.  
d) Insert your name and combination in the footer.  
e) Save your work as your name and combination.  
f) Print your work.  
  

--- PAGE 137 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 137 
 
WEB DESIGN. 
Introduction  
Web design  is a process of planning and creating a website. While designing 
websites, texts, images, digital media, interactive elements and tables can be used 
by the web designer to produce an outstanding website that can be seen on the 
web browser.  
Web design basically deals with developing preliminary web pages  
A web design program /application is a computer program that is used to create, 
edit and upload web pages and websites.  
Examples of web design software/application include;  
i. Html-kit tools.  
ii. Serif web Plus  
iii. Coffee Cup Visual Site Designer.  
iv. Web Easy Professional.  
v. Net Object Fusion  
vi. Adobe Dream Weaver Cs.5.  
vii. Ace HTML 6 Pro  
viii. Ultra Edit.  
ix. Web studio  
What is a web site?  
One can define a web site as a collection of related web pages.  
Or  
This is a document available on the World Wide Web that is created using html 
(Hyper Text Markup Language) and can be viewed with an internet browser. For 
instance Google, Netscape, explorer among others.  
A web page can contain graphics, image, text, link s and other multimedia 
components. A web page can be made up of a number of separate paged 
documents. It is normally a collection of documents that make up a website.  
A home page:  this is main page or the cover page of the web document that 
contains an index or table of content to the rest of the documents.  
Usually, a web site after being fully developed/designed, it is hosted on at least one 
web server that is accessible via a network such as a the internet network, or any 
other available private network.  
The most common way to get a web site is to feed in or enter that Uniform 
Resource Locator (URL). 
• A Uniform Resource Locator  is a unique address of the file that is accessible 
over the internet.  
 
 
 

--- PAGE 138 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 138 
 
INTRODUCTION TO BASIC HTML. 
A html stand for Hyper Text Markup Language. It is specifically a language for 
displaying web pages. It is not a programming language but a markuplanguage.  
A markup language is a set of markup tags.  
Tags majorly give the browser instructions on page disp lay. They include 
thestarting tag ( <) and the closing tag (>) they are normally enclosed in angle 
brackets i.e.  
<Html>. They normally come in pairs e.g. <h 1> and </h1>. The first tag in the pair 
is the “start tag” and the second is the “end tag”. 
A html file is a text containing small markup tags.  
A markup tag is one that tells the web browser how to display the page. AHTML 
must have an htm or html file extension. A HTML file can he created using a simple 
text editor.  
Let‟s try to work out with HTML  
In window environment, follow the following steps.  
1. Click start on the task bar  
2. Select all programs  
3. Select accessories  
4. Select notepad.  
Here, the first tag on your html document is <html>. This tells your browserthat 
this is the start of an html document.  
The last tag should be </html>. This tag tells your browser that this is the end of 
the html document.  
The text between the <head> tag and </head> tag is the header information.  
Header information is not displayed in the browser window.  
The text between the <title> ta and </title> tag is the title of your document. The 
title is displayed in your browsers‘ caption (title bar).  
The text between the <body> tag and Thody> tag is the text that will be displayed in 
your browser.  
Example;  
<Html> 
<Head> 
<Title> title of the page </ title> 
</head> 
<Body> 
This is my first home page <b> this text is bold </b> 
</body> 
</html> 
Save the file as ―home page.htm‖ or homepage.html‖ on your desktop.  

--- PAGE 139 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 139 
 
Elaboration;  
In the above example <b> tag and </b> tag makes the text between bold.  
Open the file you have just created by using the browser on your computer. 
(Internet explorer, Firefox or opera)  
You should then be able to see an address in the dialog box for example 
“C:/desktop/homepage.htm” this is if you are using windows XP. And for windows 
7, one hou1d be able to see file:///C:users/usernarne/Dsektop/homepage. htm 
Saving a html file:  
 Select file (Alt + F) then you will be presented with a dialog box  
 Select Save As.  
 Make a new folder and name it whichever name you want. Then open it.  
 Type ―page 1‖.html on file name  
 Select the destination/file location 
 Then save.  
Changing colors:  
To change background colors, keep the other line written and follow the following 
steps;  
 <BODY BGCOLOR= ―#CCFFCC‖> 
</BODY>.  
Note: if the background colors are specified that is not one of the known colors, 
thenthe browser will usually pick the closest of these colors to use.  
Formatting tags. (Bolding)  
We can make things bold by  
 = <BODY>something or what you want to bold <B>cool</B></BODY> 
 Cool 
 What we are trying to tell the browser is that at the <B> start making things 
bold 
 And at the </B>stop making things bold. 
Formatting tags (italics)  
The same principal applies to italics 
 <BODY>something<|           |  
 rz‘ <B>cool</B>‘</BODY>.  
Something really cool.  
 
 
Underlining  
 <BODY><U>something or what you want to underline </U></>really</ I> 
 <B>cool</B></BODY> 

--- PAGE 140 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 140 
 
Something really cool  
Font sizing  
To change the font size, you need to first add the font tag  
 First add the <FONT> tags.  
 <BODY>something to font size  
 <FONT>cool</FONT></BODY then specify a SIZE attribute.  
 <BODY> something really <FONTSIZE=6>cool</FONT></BODY> 
i.e. something really cool 
 
 
RESOURCE QUESTIONS FOR WEB DESIGN. 
1. Using any available web publishing software, design a web page for a hotel. 
Make sure our home page is impressive but not too slow to download.  
You are expected to include: 
a) page title  
b) less graphics  
c) Work (text) text between 150 — 200.  
d) not more than two links  
e) an ordered list (6 hobbies)  
f) good designing  
g) Creativity.  
as a member of the environment club you are assigned to design a web page‖ on 
the effects of pollution on society‖  
You are expected.  
Include the following  
i. page title  
ii. less graphics  
iii. not more than 100 words  
iv. one link to environ@yahoo.com  
v. creativity  
vi. date/source/feed back  
b. the pages should be well linked  
c. save your work as ―My web‖  

--- PAGE 141 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 141 
 
2. Using any available web publishing software, design a website for the ministry of 
education.  
You are expected to include the following:  
a. A page title  
b. Appropriate graphics  
c. A 100-120 word text  
d. 1 link(for the ministry‘s email address)  
e. Table showing the duties of the ministry  
f. Layout  
g. Creative designing  
h. Save your work as education ministry. 
3. You are contracted to design a web page for Mukono industries. As a web 
master, you are required to include:  
i. A page title  
ii. Appropriate graphics  
iii. Not more than 120 words on the company and its products  
iv. A link for each of the products  
v. A layout  
vi. The author of the text who can be contracted•  
vii. Creativity  
viii. Save your web site as Mukono.  
4. Using any available web publishing software, design a two page web site for your 
former primary school:  
i. The first page is the index or home page, it should include:  
a. The name of the school and the school logo.(the logo does not have to be the 
actual logo of the school)  
b. Any introduction information  
c. Address of the school (does not have to be the actual address)  
d. A facility for visitors to sd an e-mail to the school.  
e. Navigation bars  
(ii) The second page should contain a bulleted list of the department  in the school, 
and a table showing at least four teachers indicating the classes and the respective 
subjects they teach.  
 
 
The two pages must be linked together.  
• Save your website as name primary school.  
• Print out the home page and the linked pages.  

--- PAGE 142 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 142 
 
5. Using web design software of your choice, design a web site for your former 
primary school which includes:  
a. An index page with the name of the school and a picture of an important  
feature in the school. (The picture does not have to be the actual one but  
should be closely related.)  
b. One page on the,  
i. Different subjects offered  
ii. School admission  
iii. Sports and co- curricular activities.  
iv. Neighboring community.  
6. Using any available publishing software design a school home page .make sure 
the home page is very impressive but too slow to download. 
You are expected to include the following,  
a. A page title  
b. Appropriate graphics  
c. A 100-l20 word text  
d. 1 link (for the school email address)  
e. Table — showing at least four years UCE performance by the school.  
f. Layout  
g. Creative designing  
h. Save your work as my school 
 
7. A company called atekere milk production and accessories is willing to employ 
your services as a website authorizing specialist to design a website for them. This 
will include the following:  
The page should have,  
I. Provision for inserting the company‘s products picture.  
II. Eight departments i.e.  
 Director‘s office  
 Production department‘s Office  
 Human resource office  
 Accounts office  
 Welfare department  
 Engineering department  
 Security department  

--- PAGE 143 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 143 
 
 Transport office  
a. Create a link on the production department in (a) (ii) above that will lead you  to 
page explaining what the department does.  
b. Include the company‘s vision, mission, and core values‘ statement at the bottom 
of the index page.  
c. Provision  should be made for originality, creativity innovation andappropriate 
use of graphics.  
d. Save your work in your name and index number  
e. Print your work.  
 
8. Using any available web publishing software, design your school‘s home page  
make sure that your school is well represented in this project.  
You are expected to include the following:  
a. Page title  
b. Less graphics  
c. Word (text) between 100-1 10.  
d. 1 link (for the school‘s e-mail address.)  
e. Table -showing four departments of your school.  
f. Designing  
g. Creativity.  
 
9. You are contracted to design a web page for Mukwano industries. As a web 
master, you are required to include:  
a. Page title.  
b. Appropriate graphics  
c. Not more than 120 words on the company and its products.  
d. A link for each of the products.  
e. A layout.  
f. The author of the text who can be contacted.  
g. Creativity.  
h. Save your work as on a RW CD as Mukwano.  
 

--- PAGE 144 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 144 
 
10. The great lakes region is moving into a political, economical and social 
federation. The three countries are determined to form the most powerful co -
operation.  
Using any availab1e we b publishing software, design a web page for this 
community Make sure your home page is impressive, creative arid has appropriate 
graphics,and not too download.  
a. The home page should have a short story about  
b. The home page should have a link of four countries. 
c. Each link page in (ii) above should have a short story about that country.  
d. Indicate your name index number as footer.  
e. Saveyourwork GRELAR 
f. Print your work including your skills.  
 
11. As a professional web designer, you are contracted to design a web page Mr. 
M&J hotel Bwebajja. This should include among others,  
I. Provision for inserting the company‘s products picture.  
II. Eight departmentsi.e. 
 Director‘s office.  
 Procurement department.  
 Human resource office  
 Account‘s office.  
 Operation‘s department  
 Engineering department  
 Security department  
 Transport office.  
a. Create a link of the operations department in (a)(ii)above that will lead you to 
page explaining what the department does.  
b. Include the company‘s vision, mission and core values‘ stamen at the bottom 
of the index page.  
c. Provision should be made for originality, creativity, innovation and 
appropriate use of graphics.  
d. Save your work in your name and index number.  
e. Print your work.  
12. Using any available publishing software, design a website about your personal 
information. ).  

--- PAGE 145 ---
 A complete Practical Guide to O ‘level A ‘level and Institutions Page 145 
 
a. Create a home page for your personal information with appropriate links to 
other following pages.  
b. Create other pages with the following information.  
Page I: page title, bio-data e.g. name, age, nationality and religion.  
Page II: a table of schools attended, period of attendance and qualifications 
acquired.  
Page III: a bulleted list of activities and responsibilities held e.g. had prefect.  
Page IV: hobbies and special skills.  
Note:  
I. Create a moving (marquee) page title.  
II. Use appropriate graphics.  
III. Insert a personal e-mail address (e-mail hyperlink) of the page.  
IV. Save your work as name and index number.  
V. Print your work.  
